***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from April 2013 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the April issue of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-april-issue-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Wednesday, April 3rd, 2013

**April Fool! But who’s being fooled? (Hint: It’s not just today…)**

This newsletter is being sent out on April Fool’s Day, a traditional
time for those who operate more or less as truth-tellers to spin
whoppers that are so whopping that they couldn’t be mistaken for the
truth. Or could they?

For example: It is easy – and for the moguls of consumer capitalism,
quite profitable – for us to swallow the notion that paying large fees
for monthly access to the “free” Internet is “just natural.”

Also: We are frequently persuaded by arguments that paying workers more,
or providing them with paid sick leave, or allowing them to organize for
better working conditions, will cut so deeply into the profit margins of
large corporations that their inability to pay hefty quarterly dividends
to shareholders will tank the economy.

These are those same large corporations that generally masquerade as, or
hide behind the gauzy myth of, job-creating “small businesses.”

Likewise the constant refrain that what was once the world’s most adept
and advanced national producer of advanced technology is now unable to
transform our energy regime to alternatives, but must instead keep on
making smoke with the same old carbon extractives.

And did we mention that representative democracy, populated by
politicians who depend almost entirely on corporate contributions to be
re-elected, might not in fact always make decisions in the interest of
the public, despite tearful protestations?

As socialists, we have a duty to change those features of our society,
and to help working people understand that the vast crop of whoppers
they are told every day about the benefits of corporate consumerism and
the wisdom of the financial markets has created the terrain of misery we
experience. But when corporate capitalism manages the gates of
information and spins the load of lies that it has – April Fool’s Day
24/7/365 – we will probably need to step it up. *(This introduction has
been slightly update from the version emailed on April 1, 2013)*

**OUR OFFERINGS FOR APRIL** begin with a look behind the veil at what
could be “NAFTA on steroids” – the Trans Pacific Partnership that is
being developed in discussions with other national trade diplomats, but
may in fact be the result of a confab over all our heads of the moguls
of manufacturing, trade and financial markets. The result, Andy Feeney
outlines, could be more exploitation of workers both here and overseas,
even more loss of democratic control over how future trade relations are
conducted, and a raging disregard for the effects on the environment and
global climate of continued exploitation of resources. [*Read complete
article.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=4a3d6a88ab&e=003de9ccab)

**INEQUALITY AND ITS DISCONTENTS…** Joseph Stiglitz, economics Nobel
laureate, has in his most recent book, *The Cost of Inequality*,
described the long-term effects of the rising disparity between the 1%
and the rest of us. The slow-ending Great Recession, we have heard, is
costing an entire generation of young people their chance to create a
full life. Stiglitz, as Dan Adkins recounts in his review, deals with
that and more. [*Read complete
article.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=247ac7847a&e=003de9ccab)

**MORE SPECIAL THAN USUAL** …The upcoming special election in D.C. has
some unusual features, Bill Mosley details in his analysis. Not only
does it proffer an essentially open council seat and a small platoon of
candidates – one of whom could take the post with far less than a
majority – but it offers voters a chance to tell Congress to butt out of
the District’s budget process. It’s a high-risk proposition that could
stick. [*Read complete
article.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6b761d24ba&e=003de9ccab)

**AFTER CAPITALISM, WHAT…?** Our monthly Socialist Salon spent its most
recent evening chewing through David Schweickart’s 2002 book, After
Capitalism. Schweickart’s proposal for workplace democracy and a
contained capitalism harmonizes with some more recent analyses of worker
coops in the US and elsewhere. His vision of a “successor system” to
corporate capitalism got a varied reception, and the Washington
Socialist is publishing some commentary from participants. DC Metro DSA
co-chair Jose Gutierrez and Steering Committee member Andy Feeney were
co-presenters of the book at the event and Ross Templeton has a
different critique of the vision. [*Read complete
article.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f2b83c3ecf&e=003de9ccab)

**DEPARTURE OF A GATEKEEPER** …The FCC chairman, Julius Genachowski, has
announced his long-expected departure from the job. Carolyn Byerly
recounts his tenure as an unabashed fan of Big Telecomm and willingness
to give away public resources – bandwidth on the spectrum – to the
megacorporations that are coming to dominate the business that most of
us tithe to for our Internet “privileges.” Who should replace him?
Byerly has some ideas. [*Read complete
article.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=2580feeaf6&e=003de9ccab)

**STAY HOME, LOSE PAY** The Maryland Legislature is well-designed for
the continuing comfort of business interests, and one of its most
reliable mechanisms derailed a House of Delegates bill that would have
afforded up to seven days of earned sick leave for 700,000 Maryland
workers who now don’t have any. The Senate version is still on life
support, Woody Woodruff reports, but it may be a matter of “wait till
next year.” [*Read complete
article.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=191c9d89ce&e=003de9ccab)

[*DC Special Election: A Scrum for the At-Large Seat; a Message for
Congress*](http://dsadc.org/dc-special-election-a-scrum-for-the-at-large-seat-a-message-for-congress/)

Sunday, March 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist*** **&lt;&gt; April 2013**

*By Bill Mosley*

The April 23 special election to fill an at-large seat on the DC Council
is the latest link in a chain of events precipitated by the last year’s
resignation of Council Chair Kwame Brown, following his pleading guilty
to charges of bank fraud and campaign violations.  Last November,
then-At-Large Councilmember Phil Mendelson was elected council chair,
replacing Brown.  Continuing the game of musical chairs, Mendelson’s old
seat is now open, necessitating the upcoming balloting.

But before delving into the specifics of the at-large election, I’d like
to call attention to another issue on the ballot:  an amendment to the
DC charter, placed on the ballot by the District Council, to free the DC
budget from the congressional appropriations process.  The entanglement
of the District budget in federal appropriations, a byproduct of
congressional control over DC legislation, has been a major obstacle to
effective governance since the District gained limited home rule in
1974.  Besides delaying the District’s ability to put its budget into
effect, Congress has exploited the process to add legislative “riders”
on the DC budget that impose right-wing social policy over the
objections of the local citizenry.  In the recent past, these riders
have banned the District from adopting domestic partnership laws,
allowing the use of marijuana for medical purposes, and carrying out a
needle-exchange program to prevent the spread of HIV and AIDS.  While
all these restrictions were eventually lifted, the threat of
Congressional meddling is ever-present:  Two years ago Congress barred
the District from paying for abortions for poor women, a restriction
that still stands.

The legality of the District’s unilaterally abolishing congressional
budget oversight has been questioned by D.C. Attorney General Irvin
Nathan and other legal experts.  In addition, many statehood advocates
have criticized the move as a distraction when the focus should be on
full statehood, which would bring with it full budget and legislative
autonomy.  Nevertheless, the DC government should be looking at ways to
force the issue of independence from Congress, and the Council deserves
credit for its creativity and for seizing the initiative.  Even if the
measure is eventually overturned, it could force members of Congress to
go on record against democracy and in favor of micromanaging the
District’s affairs.  Statehood and full-democracy advocates should
applaud this newfound willingness on the part of DC legislators to
confront Congress directly.

.           Now, for the Council race:

Elections in DC to fill vacant seats are one-round-only affairs, with no
primary.  Any registered voter, regardless of party affiliation, can get
on the ballot by submitting the required 3,000 petition signatures. 
These elections can have crowded fields, and the April 23 ballot will
feature seven candidates.  Only a plurality of votes is needed to win.

Even though this election is to fill a vacant seat, there is an
“incumbent” in the race.  Due to an oddity of DC election law, whenever
an at-large council seat becomes vacant, the political party of the
former member selects an interim councilmember to occupy the office
until a special election is held.   In this case, the DC Democratic
Committee selected its chairperson, Anita Bonds, as interim
councilmember.  (There is growing sentiment for eliminating the ability
of parties to select interim councilmembers and to simply leave the
office vacant until an election can be held).  It should be noted that
being an interim councilmember is not necessarily an electoral advantage
– most recently, Sekou Biddle, appointed by the party as interim member
when Kwame Brown moved up to council chair, lost his seat to Vincent
Orange in the 2011 special election.

Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America has not endorsed a candidate
in the race.  However, there are significant differences between the
candidates.  The brief summaries below are my own personal observations,
and offered as an informal guide for DSA members and other readers of
the *Washington Socialist*.  Comments and contrary views from readers
are welcome and encouraged.  Those wanting detailed descriptions of the
candidates’ views should visit their websites.

**Anita Bonds** – As the anointed favorite of the DC Democratic State
Committee, Bonds is the nominal front-runner and the “establishment”
candidate.   She has a long history of involvement in DC civic affairs,
much of it Democratic Party-related, and as a senior government official
in several mayoral administrations.  DC statehood advocates, however,
can’t forget that it was on her watch that the national Democratic Party
dropped support for statehood from its 2012 platform, with seemingly
little protest from her or other local Democratic leaders.

**Michael A. Brown** – Brown is attempting to return to the Council
after his loss last year, following a campaign plagued by missing
campaign funds and charges of ethical lapses.  During his single term on
the Council, Brown was perhaps the elected official most active in
promoting the cause of DC statehood.  He served as an Independent in the
at-large seat reserved for non-Democrats, but for this race he has
reclaimed his previous identity as a Democrat.

**Matthew Frumin** – Frumin, a Democrat, is a Ward 3 advisory
neighborhood commissioner.  Despite being a candidate without much of a
citywide profile or record, he is running hard and was an early leader
in the fundraising race.  His campaign literature, other than mentioning
the need for voting representation and DC statehood, runs the gamut of
noncontroversial apple-pie issues:  education, jobs, infrastructure, and
helping seniors.

**Patrick Mara** – The sole Republican in the race, Mara previously
challenged Councilmember Carol Schwartz for the 2008 GOP nomination for
an at-large seat.  He won the primary, but lost the general election to
Michael A. Brown.  In 2010, he was elected to the DC State Board of
Education.  He had hardly settled into that office when he was running
for Council again, this time falling short in the April 2011 special
election won by Vincent Orange.  Despite his eagerness to leave the
Board of Education behind, he bills himself as an “education reformer,”
and in true Republican fashion advocates a freeze on taxes and lower
regulatory burdens on business.

**Perry Redd** – Redd, a first-time candidate and member of the
Statehood Green Party, has a platform stressing DC statehood, tax and
budget fairness, and policies to create jobs for DC residents.  Redd’s
website speaks frankly about his past incarceration due to substance
abuse and later, as an activist in Tennessee for workers’ rights and
against police brutality, being indicted on gun and drug-trafficking
charges (of which he was eventually cleared) which he believed were in
retaliation for his activism.

**Elissa Silverman** – Silverman is a Democrat and journalist, formerly
covering DC issues for the *Washington Post* and *Washington City
Paper*.  More recently, she was a leader of the unsuccessful campaign
for a ballot initiative to eliminate corporate campaign contributions in
local election. She promises to focus on “integrity, accountability and
investment.”

**Paul Zukerberg** – Political newcomer and Democrat Zukerberg’s
platform stresses one central issue:  decriminalization of marijuana
possession – a worthy issue, given how excessive penalties for this
offense has saddled hundreds of young people in the District with
criminal records for life, but is it enough to build a Council campaign
around?  His literature does also indicate that he is against crime, for
improving schools and for “making DC a better place.”

A special election with a large field of candidates such as this one
breaks the mold of the typical DC race, where the meaningful vote is the
Democratic primary.  A lesser-known candidate can sneak through to
victory with less than a majority of the vote by standing out from the
crowd or capturing the support of a small, well-targeted constituency. 
That was the path taken by a relatively unknown, openly gay Republican
named David Catania when he upset interim councilmember and Democratic
Party favorite Arrington Dixon in 1997.  Sixteen years later, Catania
(no longer a Republican) is still on the Council.   There are
undoubtedly a few candidates in this election dreaming of following
Catania’s path into the Wilson Building.

[*How Inequality Hurts Everyone: Review of “The Price of Inequality” by
Joseph E.
Stiglitz*](http://dsadc.org/how-inequality-hurts-everyone-review-of-the-price-of-inequality-by-joseph-e-stiglitz/)

Sunday, March 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2013**

** ***By Daniel Adkins*

This splendid economics book is great because it tells you who is
screwing you and how they are doing it.  A major theme of the book is
that our current increasing inequality is the result of political forces
more than economic forces.  All economies’ systems exist in the context
of their government’s rules or lack of rules.

 

**Alleged Markets as Scams**

Dr. Stiglitz demonstrates that much of the wealth in the US stems from
wealth transfers instead of wealth creation. One example in the book is
the role played by “economic rent,” defined as a payment to a factor of
production in excess of that which is needed to keep it employed in its
current use.  Such rents can arise when monopolies charge inflated
prices for goods after they have eliminated their competition or when
banks too big to fail can take risks they could not sustain without a
government to bail them out. Also an example of rent is that Obamacare
does not allow the government to negotiate drug prices, thus giving drug
companies excess profits by not having to compete.  A law passed by
Congress not allowing student loans to be canceled by bankruptcy removed
banks from any risk that the student or educational institution might
not be viable and placed all the risk on the student.  This subverts the
student and the market.  Another example is the United States using
defense spending to “stabilize” risky markets (i.e. keeping the price of
oil down and stable), thus giving oil companies and fossil fuels a pass
on market risks.  The book maintains that rent-seeking impairs overall
economic efficiency by using market manipulations to subsidize
corporations by public funds.  Economic rents are merely redistribution
of wealth from the many to the few.

This book’s hypothesis is that markets are real but shaped (corrupted)
by the political process.  In a real market (one with competition) the
laws of competition say the profits should decline due to competition,
but with the improper government support they can be maintained.
 Current market imbalances partially resulted from technological changes
that make it difficult for labor to migrate to new markets, but more
important is that government has been managed to extend monopoly rents
to favor some and disadvantage the many.

 

**Democracy in Peril**

Inequality, then,  has not risen from abstract market forces but has
been shaped by political efforts.  For the 1%, spending in elections is
not a civic duty but an investment for which they expect a return.  This
tilting of the economy and the Great Recession has eroded the public
trust and social cohesion.  Inequality erodes social capital (trust),
sowing the seeds of conflict.  Trust is needed for people to believe in
the political system.  Americans have been proud that their economy was
fair but this belief has been greatly challenged and no longer works. 
The wealthy try to disenfranchise the poor and disempower the rest by
unlimited corporate donations and setting the social-political dialogue
with economic theories (i.e. markets are self-correcting) that are
proven false but repeated so often that many think them true.  Also, the
Constitution does not give corporations any inalienable rights but the
Supreme Court is trying to.  A great effort has been made to make
unethical and undemocratic practices legal.

The 1% has rigged politics and political discussion to promote their
interests.  Their influences have subverted the US political system, and
neither political party has shown any interest in reforming the system. 
Candidates are so dependent on campaign funds that they are easily
manipulated.  The revolving doors between politicians and lobbyists
subvert our politics.  Wall Street has cognitively captured the
regulatory agencies by the revolving door between them and by setting
the ideological discussion.  Elections and politics have become a game
of redistricting and manipulation by advertising.  The war on government
is an ideology to make sure the public does not interfere with the 1%’s
acquisition of wealth even when that acquisition covers almost all of
the nation’s profits and more.

Extreme concentration of income is not compatible with democracy and
creates an entitled class born to wealth but expanding their wealth by
market manipulation not invention.  This group aims to privatize as much
of the government as possible.

 

**Paths Forward**

Stiglitz sees two routes toward reform.  One is if the 99% come to
realize that what is good for the 1% is not in their interest.  If the
99% realize this, we have a political system that can be redefined to
promote less-corrupted markets and politics, political space for unions
and public interests, fact-based media, new types of economic
organization like codetermination, and a viable democracy.  Such a
movement has not crystallized yet, but the Great Recession and economic
stress are removing illusions at a fast rate.

The other possibility would be if the 1% see the error of their ways. 
Waiting around for this option does not seem useful, but the current
strategy of the 1% is pushing the US into a being a less-developed
country at a disadvantage in competing with developed and emerging
countries.

The reasons why the 1% might change their minds are also reasons that
the 99% must push for change.  The US does not have a national
competitor to make the 1% want an efficient and powerful economy, but
the US decline is increasing.  Already many of the US’s advantages have
dropped to the bottom rank among developed countries.  Although the
possibilities of a major war are not great, it should be remembered that
we won WWII by overwhelmingly out-producing the Axis, and now that
manufacturing base is disappearing.  US upward mobility is now less than
many developed countries because of US educational costs, our health
services costing twice as much for ~~worst~~ worse results, and the
focus on short–term profits blinding us to the needs of long-term
challenges such as worldwide climate change.  All of these changes are
minimizing US influence which will decline naturally as the world
develops.  The question remains, do we want to continue to accelerate
that decline and our demise?

One outstanding part of the book is the wealth of documentation and
references.  This may allow us to demystify the arguments of those who
try to maintain the political and economic scam of the American people.

This book is a good statement of the current economic problems. But
better treatments are found in Robert Reich’s *Supercapitalism;* Paul
Krugman’s *The Conscience of a Liberal;* and Jeffery Sachs’ *The Price
of Civilization.* What those three sources offer which I find lacking in
Stiglitz is a good comparison of American economic performance since
from 1950 to at least 1973 and from 1980 to 2007. The earlier period
shows the performance of the economy which was governed by a
“democratic” set of laws and regulations. The period since 1980 shows
the performance of the economy under an increasingly plutocratic set of
laws and regulations.

[*Impressions and Responses: Socialist Salon on Schweickart’s “After
Capitalism”*](http://dsadc.org/impressions-and-responses-socialist-salon-on-schweickarts-after-capitalism/)

Sunday, March 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist*** **&lt;&gt; April 2013**

***Nearly 20 members of the local and interested parties met March 21 in
our monthly “Socialist Salon” to discuss Schweickart’s book. Co-chair
Jose Gutierrez and Steering Committee member Andy Feeney led the
discussion, and their contributions  — Gutierrez’ thematic summary and
Feeney’s view as a self-described “fan” – are foregrounded here. Ross
Templeton’s robust critique of the book anchored and represented a
lively discussion and debate. A 2004  *review by Carl Davidson* called
it “an excellent starting point and organizing principle” for radicals,
and also provides a detailed breakdown.***

**Review of the economic model described in *After Capitalism*,  by
David Schweickart**

*By Jose Gutierrez*

What follows is what I hope is a simple description of David
Schweickart’s proposal for a postcapitalist economy.

**Public Provision of Goods **

According to Schweickart, his proposal, which he calls “Economic
Democracy,” would build on the foundation of Nordic social democracy so
that certain vital services such as health care, education, child care
and elder care would be economic rights to which all citizens would be
entitled.

**Competitive market for goods and services **

Schweickart believes that markets are superior to central planning but
that they should be confined to goods and services and not embrace labor
or capital.

**Workplace democracy **

The labor market would be replaced with worker self-management.
Enterprises would be organized as democratic communities.

**Social control of investment **

The surplus value created by workers would be channeled to a national
investment fund. All enterprises would be charged a capital asset tax
for this purpose. Public banks would draw from this investment fund and
worker-managed enterprises would be created using these funds or would
add employees to existing enterprises.

**Full employment**

Under capitalism unemployment serves the function of keeping working
people as a class in check. This would not be the case under Economic
Democracy.  Public banks would have a mandate to expand employment.
Schweickart believes that in spite of this the government should have a
role as employer of last resort to guarantee full employment.

**Capitalism within socialism. **

There would continue to exist a sector composed of small private
businesses. Schweickart believes that for the sake of innovation and
economic dynamism it would be healthy for such a sector to exist, and
the fact that this sector would have to compete with democratically run
companies and with the government as employer of last resort would keep
the antisocial tendencies of these companies in check.

**Socialist protectionism **

A tariff would be created that would tax goods created with low wages or
that were the result of environmentally unsound practices.

**Leisure\
**Schweickart draws on the work of Juliet Schor, professor of sociology
at Boston College, who has studied trends in working time, leisure and
women’s issues. Schor wrote, among several other books, *The Overworked
American*. He mentions her work on leisure and how many Americans are
either overworked or don’t have work. Shortening the workweek and
sharing work are part of his vision of socialism. He argues that under
“Economic Democracy” both government- and worker-managed firms should
reduce the workweek for the sake of a more balanced life outside of work
and for environmental reasons.

**Democracy\
**Worker-managed enterprises would be by definition an expansion of
democracy. Through social control of investment, the polity at the
national, state and local level would have a say over investment
decisions, which would also be a democratic victory.

Most importantly, there would not be a large capitalist class that
through campaign contributions, lobbyists and think tanks comes to
dominate the political system. That class also could not engage in an
investment strike that could bring down the government.

Schweickart also argues that his proposal would not be a panacea that
would solve gender equality issues and environmental degradation, but he
thinks it would lay a strong foundation to address both issues.

 

**A Model for “Market Socialism” With Workers’ Control**

*By Andy Feeney*

As the host of this event and a fan of Schweickart’s book, I thought
this was an excellent Salon.  There was more debate and disagreement
with Schweickart’s vision than I expected or hoped for, but I believe
it’s essential for DSA members to undertake exactly this kind of debate
in order to develop a persuasive vision that can make real democratic
socialism possible in the United States – if not in my lifetime, then in
that of younger DSA members.

“Utopian” visions of the socialist future and detailed plans for what a
socialist society should look like have had a bad reputation in Marxist
socialist circles since the 1840s, when Marx and Engels in *The
Communist Manifesto* repudiated visionary socialism as a waste of time..
They instead looked to class struggle, rooted in the obvious conflicts
between 19^th^ century capitalists and the European proletariat, as the
only “scientific” path to a revolutionary future.

The problem is, it was fairly easy for revolutionary (and not so
revolutionary) socialists to agree on the struggle against capitalism
and imperialism so long as no one was quite sure what “socialism” or
“communism” would mean in practice. And for better or worse, this
situation dramatically changed with the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917.

Since the Bolshevik Revolution, millions of people around the world have
identified “socialism” with what Lenin, Trotsky, and later Stalin and
Stalin’s heirs wrought in Russia and Eastern Europe – a model of
“socialism” that essentially collapsed in approximately 1990.

Millions of others have identified “socialism” with non-revolutionary
European social democracy, as implemented by socialist parties (in name,
anyway) in France, Germany, Scandinavia and to some extent the United
Kingdom.  But this “socialism” is essentially capitalism with a strong
welfare state and a powerful union movement, and since the 1980s many
“socialist” European parties have in fact implemented capitalist-style
austerity programs to the dismay of their own supporters.

Countless other advocates of “socialism” since the 1960s have looked to
African socialism, pan-Arab socialism etc. as models of how a
non-capitalist future should be built, yet these non-western “socialist”
models in many cases have failed as well.

One result is that by the early 1980s, a triumphant Margaret Thatcher in
Britain could spearhead the reversal of British “socialism,” such as it
was, and the dismantling of Labour Party reforms on the basis that
free-market capitalism is inevitable, since (supposedly) “there is no
alternative” – a position conservatives have sometimes abbreviated as
TINA.

Echoing Thatcher and the TINA school of conservative capitalism, US
philosopher Francis Fukayama wrote in the late 1980s that “capitalist
market democracy” was the *End of History* – that in the crucible of
world economic competition, capitalism had proven itself superior for
all time to “socialism” in any guise*,* and that the global future thus
must be capitalist.

As an older American radical from the 1970s, David Schweickart has been
arguing for decades that TINA is simply wrong – that there is IS an
alternative to capitalism.  And in *After Capitalism*, Schweickart shows
the outlines of an alternative system that he argues could be just as
economically efficient as capitalism, but without capitalism’s obvious
flaws.

Such flaws include chronically high unemployment, endemic job
insecurities for millions of workers, uncontrolled flight of capital
investment and capitalist factories from high-wage societies like the
United States to low-wage societies like China, and not the least, the
ecologically ruinous addiction to perpetual economic growth that
characterizes capitalist economies more than any previous economies in
history.

Schweickart characterizes capitalist economies as rested on three or
four key principles, including a market exchange of goods and services,
a private market for capital investment, and “wage labor” – a
hierarchical organization of work in which relatively powerless workers
(in Marx’s terms, “proletarians”), in exchange for monetary pay, must
essentially accept the dictatorial power of capitalist bosses and
capitalist owners in the workplace.

The failed “socialism” of the old Soviet Union, Schweickart argues,
abandoned the market exchange of goods and services, adopting central
economic planning instead. It also replaced private capital markets with
government investment.  But it retained wage labor and the hierarchical
subordination of working people to managers – in this case, managers
working for the State. In the process, it subjected working people to a
form of “alienation” that Marx saw as a key feature of capitalism and
its major flaw.

Schweickart in *After Capitalism* proposes instead to abandon
Soviet-style central economic planning and retain a market exchange of
goods and services.  But his model – based in part on what Tito
attempted to achieve in Yugoslavia in the 1960s and 1970s – would
replace wage labor with worker control over the means of production.

Scwheickart also would jettison both central government control of
investment and a private capital market and replace them with public
control over investment through regional or state-controlled public
banks.

One striking feature of Schweickart’s vision of “Economic Democracy,” to
my mind, is that he explicitly proposes to eliminate capitalist
investors as a social class – at least on a lasting basis. Most
functions now served by private investors would be taken over by
worker-managed enterprises, elected factory managers and public banks in
Economic Democracy as Schweickart outlines it.

Private entrepreneurs, even large ones, would be allowed to practice
capitalism on a limited basis, but none could pass on their holdings to
their heirs.  Instead, all privately owned firms would be socialized
upon the owner’s death, thus – in Schweickart’s mind – preventing the
permanent existence of private capitalists as a class.

In my view, Schweickart’s “market-socialism” with workers’ control
offers an economically plausible model of a non-capitalist future that
might eventually allow socialist movements to regain the sense of hope
and possibility that much of the left lost with the crimes and mistakes
of Stalinism, the compromises of Euro social democracy, the failure of
Gorbachev’s *perestroika* and the disappointing performance of most
forms of Third World socialism.

However, some participants at our Socialist Salon clearly disagree with
the model, and I think some of their criticisms are instructive.

I hope our debate on Thursday \[March 21\] will help to engage all of us
more in thinking seriously about a non-capitalist future, whether it
takes the form of “market socialism” and “worker control” as Schweickart
envisions them or not.

What’s essential is not that democratic socialists sign up for any
particular model of the future – Schweickart’s or anybody else’s.
 What‘s essential is that we come up with a cogent reply to the TINA
argument posed by the conservatives – and also, unfortunately, by all
too many liberals, both inside and outside of the Democratic Party.  We
need to prove to our own satisfaction – and that of a vast majority of
Americans – that another world IS possible, if people have the vision
and the courage to fight for it.

**If this is Socialism then Spam is Meat**

*By Ross Templeton*

This was a good meeting – I enjoyed it!  Lots of well-developed opinions
expressed in a genial atmosphere that seemed welcoming to newer
members.  If anyone who is reading this hasn’t made it to one of DSA’s
salons yet, I encourage them to do so.  It will be worth their while.

Getting a chance to discuss ideas, socialist or otherwise, in a group
setting is important.  The group mind can be remarkably efficient at
separating the wheat from the chaff.  A key concept that one missed will
be explained by someone else; a bias shared by one reader and the author
will be uncovered by someone with a different background.  Good ideas
get improved upon; bad ideas show their internal contradictions.

David Schweickart’s *After Capitalism* falls into the latter category. 
The book, and the model it espouses, suffers from two unfortunate
tendencies: colonization by dominant-culture ideology, and narrowness of
focus.

Schweickart seems enamored, as another salon-goer remarked to me, with
the protestant work ethic.  He bends over backward to include
capitalists, which he calls “entrepreneurs,” in his system.  He
envisions a system in which peoples’ labor is still alienated from them
by private capital.  Why?  All Schweickart can offer for justification
are assertions of the superior initiative, ingenuity and drive of
entrepreneurial capitalists.  This is laughable.  I don’t recall needing
entrepreneurs to set up the distribution of goods and services during
Occupy.  Schweickart’s worldview is so colonized by capitalist mythology
that he sees entrepreneurs as innovators, rather than as capitalists who
exploit the need for innovation.

Schweickart has been in academia for decades.  His book shows the biases
of ivory-tower theorizing.  He relies on economic models to demonstrate
his system’s functionality but misses some practical and moral flaws
that can’t be expressed in numbers.

Gender liberation is a good example.  Schweickart is personally
concerned with this issue, if we are to judge by comments in the book’s
preface.  His model, however, ignores the economic disparity between
men, women and trans people.  In fact, it would likely continue to make
it worse.  Schweickart calls for the structurally unemployed to form a
government-controlled, minimum-wage underclass.  His examples for the
tasks given to these workers, such as child and elder care, are
industries overwhelmingly staffed by women.  Women would find themselves
disproportionately relegated to this new proletariat*\[Cc1\]* .  In
addition, the disproportionate share of unpaid domestic labor performed
by women would go on unabated.

Schweickart would claim that his model is gender-blind because it is an
economic model, nothing more.  This narrowness of focus is appropriate
in a research paper, but unacceptable in a recipe for social and/or
economic change.  Gender and other culturally-constructed categories
have a real economic impact on peoples’ lives.  Any economic system that
ignores them unconsciously privileges the dominant class.

David Schweickart’s idea of socialism is too adulterated to deserve the
term.  It is weighed down by the assumptions of the capitalist era and
the baggage of patriarchy.  Nevertheless, I’m glad we had a chance to
discuss it.  Any excuse to enjoy some fine Chinese food with friends is
a good excuse to me.

See you at the next salon!

[*Paid Sick Leave Meets a Legislative
Roadblock*](http://dsadc.org/paid-sick-leave-meets-a-legislative-roadblock/)

Sunday, March 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2013**

UPDATED see below:

Like many legislatures, Maryland’s Assembly is structured to make sure
that dominant business interests have qualified veto power over populist
enthusiasms.

The House of Delegates Economic Matters Committee and the Senate’s
Finance Committee are well-fashioned roadblocks and graveyards for
progressive legislation.

Even successful legislation like this year’s offshore wind enabling act
took three sessions to fight its way through first the House ambush in
Economic Matters and then, last year, Senate Finance.  In most cases, it
is the dreaded required Fiscal Note – an economic impact statement –
that often brings an unfavorable committee report.

This year, one of many casualties of this business-friendly impact
statement was a modest attempt to bring paid sick leave to over 700,000
Maryland workers, mostly hourly wage-earners, who currently must choose
between going to work sick or losing a day’s pay. In many cases, the
choice includes caring for a sick family member, particularly a child –
or letting a sick child go to school or day care.

Economic Matters returned an unfavorable report on Del. Tom Olszewski’s
Earned Safe and Sick Leave bill (HB0735), which would have provided up
to seven earned sick leave days per year for workers in private and
public sectors not already covered by labor agreements.

The fiscal note that accompanied the bill may have doomed it before it
received a hearing before the House committee Feb. 27. Olszewski, a
Baltimore County Democrat, led off a panel of advocates who presented
evidence that the improvement in working conditions that paid sick leave
would bring – and has brought in other states – improved workplace
efficiency and productivity and, emphatically, public health.

The fiscal note, however, focused narrowly on the unnumbered but
“significant” costs to business and government that could result. No
public benefits are on the radar in most fiscal notes. This structured
business-biased ambush, plus hostile (and inaccurate) observations from
Republican members, brought the bill’s unfavorable report in mid-March
and its withdrawal by prime sponsor Olszewski. Though Democrats had a
substantial majority on Economic Matters, few sprang to the bill’s
defense. The standard mantra that even a good bill must fail in two
sessions before passing on a third attempt appeared to be in force.

*UPDATE April 3 2013: Melissa Broome of the Job Opportunities Task Force
added that the Business Regulations subcommittee of Economic Matters was
the original source of the unfavorable report. A senior policy advocate
for the Baltimore-based nonprofit, Broome said the withdrawal in part
was because “it became clear we didn’t have the votes for this year.”*

The Senate counterpart to HB0735, SB0698, is “still alive” in that body,
said one of the co-sponsors, Sen. Victor Ramirez of Prince George’s
County, in late March. His email sounded resigned, however, to refiling
it in the 2014 session. That bill, which as of March 31 had not been
withdrawn,  had a similarly rough time in a hearing on the same day in
Senate Finance, causing harried sick leave proponents to shuttle back
and forth across the crowded streets of Annapolis’s little government
sector. The documents indicate, though, that the Senate bill is
different enough from HB0735 that it did not represent a true
“cross-file.” If by some odd chance the full Senate should pass it, the
House would be able to consider it on the floor, bypassing the Economic
Matters roadblock. But the chances are slim.

The fiscal note system has done its work, making sure that the interests
of business prevailed against the needs of working people – again — at
least for this year.

— Woody Woodruff

[*What Will Obama’s Free Trade Agenda Mean for US Labor and Progressives
This
Year?*](http://dsadc.org/what-will-obamas-free-trade-agenda-mean-for-us-labor-and-progressives-this-year/)

Sunday, March 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2013**

*By Andy Feeney*

* *Predicting the course of U.S. politics is a risky business, and a
good case can be made that we will know what President Obama intends to
do about global free trade agreements when he actually does it.

But if Obama’s recent State of the Union Address and coverage in the
mainstream media are to be trusted, the Obama administration appears to
be poised to betray the interests of the American labor movement,
possibly by the end of this year, in a new free trade initiative
recalling the enactment of NAFTA and establishment of the World Trade
Organization (WTO) under Bill Clinton.

According to an article in the March/April issue of *The Washingtonian*
by Clyde Prestowitz, former U.S. trade negotiator for Ronald Reagan, and
a consultant on trade to the Clinton White House as well, the Obama
White House hopes to finish up with negotiations over a proposed Trans
Pacific Partnership (TPP) by this coming  October.

As currently envisioned, the 11-member TPP – which has been bitterly
denounced by trade analysts at Public Citizen, and which has officials
at the AFL-CIO worried about a new “race to the bottom” on wages and
worker protections among participating nations – would embrace the
United States, Canada, Mexico, Peru, Chile, New Zealand, Australia,
Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam and Brunei.

According to Prestowitz’s article, it is also possible that Japan and
South Korea might join the pact once it is approved, as could other
Pacific Rim nations who demonstrate compliance with its standards.

In a report last year, Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch concluded
that the TPP as then proposed would “extend the incentives for U.S.
firms to offshore jobs to lower-wage countries.”

The report also found that the TPP would establish secretive tribunals
for the resolution of trade disputes that would effectively give
corporations in each participating country an expanded ability to
challenge workplace safety, environmental and financial regulations
enacted by other member nations.

In essence, Public Citizen has suggested, the pact would provide
unelected panels of corporate trade representatives with a greater power
to overturn democratically enacted laws as “unfair” trade practices, and
in this way would increase the power of global corporations as a group
to dictate laws and regulatory policies to the people of the world.

TPP opponents are planning “days of action” against the TPP beginning on
May 11, shortly before TPP supporters start their next round of
negotiations, according to the Citizens Trade Campaign.

The CTC web site states that on May 11, “We can start \[to} bring the
anti-corporate globalization movement back to the streets …
Trans-national community resistance put a freeze on the WTO.  It stopped
the Free Trade Area of the Americas \[and\] it can stop the TPP.”

Suggested actions on or around May 11 include holding “community
assemblies to discuss the problems with TPP” (and with free trade in
general), and staging “creative actions or stunts that draw attention to
the TPP talks in Peru.”

Activists should visit the website TPPxBorder.org/ for information about
May 11th events already planned and to share information about those
they are developing themselves.

Labor journalist Roger Bybee, in a critical article on Obama’s trade
policies in *Dollars & Sense* last fall, portrayed the TPP and other
trade policies supported by the Obama White House as potentially
subordinating elected governments everywhere to an “emerging doctrine of
global corporate supremacy, privileging maximum investor profits over
protections for workers, consumers, and the environment.”

In a February 2013 statement recently by the AFL-CIO’s Executive
Council, the AFL-CIO stopped short of saying that the TPP must be
stopped.  But the Executive Council Statement pointed out:

“ Promoting economic growth with equity in the United States and
worldwide requires an approach that couples expansion and enforcement of
labor rights globally with necessary reforms in trade and economic
policy. These reforms must break from current policies to address income
inequality through demand-led growth, as part of a Global New Deal that
raises incomes and standards of living for all.

The U.S. trade model, which began with NAFTA and continued with the
Korea and Colombia agreements, undermines those goals by encouraging
employers to pit one group of workers against another—both within and
between countries.”

The Executive Committee continued:  “The AFL-CIO believes there is a
serious risk that the TPP ..will repeat the mistakes of the NAFTA trade
model.” The AFL-CIO has proposed a number of progressive changes to the
proposed treaty to address labor policies and the regulation of
investment, as well as “environment, food safety and other public
interest regulation.”  But  “…unless the TPP marks a break with the
current trade model,” the Executive Committee warned, “workers will be
unable to support it.”

Environmental groups warn that the TPP appeared geared to open up
natural resources to exploitation, as well as workers. According to
Greenpeace International, the TPP as proposed would promote continued
corporate destruction of tropical rainforests.

In a March 15 statement, the Sierra Club recently reacted with special
alarm to news that the new government of Japan has announced its
intention to join the TPP.

Japan is hoping for a major increase in its imports of natural gas from
North America, the Sierra Club noted, and it appears that the TPP “would
allow for automatic exports of natural gas to countries in the bloc,
overriding the Department of Energy’s ability to thoroughly review
environmental and economic impacts of the exports.”

Consequently, the Sierra Club fears that adoption of the TPP with Japan
as a member could significantly increase the dangers posed by natural
gas “fracking” and decrease the U.S. government’s ability to regulate
fracking’s adverse side effects.

Even Prestowitz, despite his championing of previous free trade deals by
the Reagan and Clinton administrations, concludes that TPP is “lose-lose
for the US, both geopolitically and economically.”

Given such negative reactions to the TPP by American constitutencies –
notably organized labor and environmentalists – that are important to
the Democratic Party, why is the White House now taking such a positive
approach to the TPP and other free trade pacts, such as those the US
signed in 2011 with South Korea, Panama and Columbia?

In 2008, Roger Bybee notes, then-presidential candidate Obama was highly
critical of the way previous free-trade deals had been negotiated and
implemented.

“Decades of trade deals like NAFTA and China have been signed with
plenty of protections for corporations and their profits,” Obama told
auto workers in a Janesville, Wisc. campaign rally, “but none for our
environment or our workers who’ve seen factories shut their doors and
millions of jobs disappear.”

Despite this 2008 campaign rhetoric, Bybee charges, Obama is now
championing the very kind of trade deal he once excoriated – resorting
to “high-profile but hollow gestures” on trade.

Many left-wing critics of Obama may be tempted to agree with Bybee,
seeing the TPP negotiations and other proposed Obama initiatives on
trade as a simple selling out of the labor movement and the liberal
environmental groups that contributed to Obama’s election and
reelection.

Arguably, though, socialists – even those who hasten to join with labor
and the more progressive green groups in opposing the TPP – would do
well to understand the roots of the President’s apparent about-face,
rather than simply being outraged by it.

According to Prestowitz and to reporter Howard Schneider, author of a
March 9 *Washington Post* article on Obama’s new drive for free trade,
there are at least two main factors now driving the administration’s
approach to trade.

One, as Prestowitz reports, is geopolitical in nature.  With the rising
economic and military power of China, the Obama administration has made
a “pivot to Asia” a foreign policy priority.

“Some Southeast Asian and East Asian countries have been looking for
assurances that the U.S. will remain engaged in the region and provide a
countervailing power” to China, Prestowitz writes.

The proposed TPP – which would include the United States and many of
these Asian nations, but would not include China – is intended (along
with an expanded US naval presence in the Western Pacific) to provide
the smaller Asian nations with the reassurances they are seeking.

The other big factor behind Obama’s push for the TPP and several other
proposed free trade arrangements, according to Schneider, is economic. 
In part, new trade pacts are supposed to counteract “sluggish job
growth” in the U.S. stemming from Obama’s inability to promote a faster
economic recovery in the face of GOP intransigence.

“Going through \[the 2008 financial crisis\] and recovery has pushed us
all to focus on what it is we can do to create jobs and growth in every
area of policy,” Schneider quotes Obama’s deputy national security
advisor for international economics, Mike Froman, as saying.

Schneider also quotes Obama’s trade representative, Ron Kirk, as saying
that “in order to turn our economy around and make America a beacon for
jobs, we could not win” by only focusing production on the 5% of the
global population residing in the United States.  Wider markets
evidently are needed.

However, Schneider observes in the *Post* article, the TPP as envisioned
today could well cost the United States additional jobs in basic
manufacturing, while advancing U.S. economic interests in “innovation,
technology and high-end services.”

Schneider sees the pact as potentially increasing the ability of U.S.
financial companies and consulting firms to penetrate foreign markets,
while biotechnology firms obtain stronger patent protections and other
high-tech US corporations enjoy more freedom “to source their software
and place their computers where it makes the most economic sense.”

Yet at the same time, critics inside and outside of the labor movement
fear that the pact could cost significant numbers of jobs in basic
American industries such as paper production and shoe manufacturing.

According to Prestowitz’s *Washington Monthly* article, the TPP could
cause the loss of 170,000 of the remaining US jobs in textile
manufacturing, while ironically also undermining the Caribbean Basin
Free Trade Agreement (CBFTA) and displacing some 1.2 million textile
workers in the islands – who like their US counterparts could lose out
to fierce Vietnamese competition.

**What We Can Do:**

The Citizens Trade Campaign, a diverse coalition of progressive interest
groups formed in 1992 to oppose NAFTA, is urging individuals to write to
Congress and the White House to oppose “fast track” treatment for the
TPP this year.  To sign up online, contact the CTC site at this web
address: 
[*http://salsa.democracyinaction.org/o/1034/p/dia/action/public/?action\_KEY=12495*](http://salsa.democracyinaction.org/o/1034/p/dia/action/public/?action_KEY=12495)

On March 4, CTC also coordinated the submission of [*a letter to
Congress*](http://www.citizenstrade.org/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/CivilSocietyLetteronFastTrackandTPP_030413.pdf)
urging a cautious rather than a “fast-track” approach to the TPP and
demanding that this and other trade pacts signed by the United States
respect eight principles.  These include (1) prioritization of human and
labor rights; (2) respect for local development goals and the
procurement policies that deliver on them; (3) no elevation of
corporations to equal terms with governments; (4) protection of food
sovereignty; (5) maintaining access to affordable medication; (6)
safeguards against currency manipulation; (7) space for robust financial
regulations and public services; and (8) improved consumer and
environmental standards.

The CTC letter also outlines ways to increase public participation and
Congressional oversight in trade policy-making through replacement of
“outdated and extreme procedures like “Fast Track,” also known as the
“Trade Promotion Authority.” This is a Nixon-era trade agreement
approval procedure that enables proposed trade pacts to circumvent
ordinary Congressional review, amendment and debate procedures.

 

Signers of the CTC letter included roughly 100 national organizations
(including DSA and Jobs with Justice) and another 300 or so local and
regional civil society organizations in the U.S, which together claim to
represent more than 15 million members.

Organizations of  note that signed the letter include the United Mine
Workers, the United Auto Workers, the American Postal Workers Union,
United Steel Workers, AFGE, Communications Workers of America, National
Nurses United, the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and a half-dozen
additional international unions in the AFL-CIO; a range of environmental
groups including the Sierra Club and the Rainforest Action Network; a
half-dozen or more progressive religious denominations ranging from the
Unitarian Universalists and United Church of Christ to Pax Christi and
the Maryknoll Office for Global Concerns; several US organizations
expressing solidarity with Latin America, and such family farm advocacy
groups as the National Farmers Union and National Family Farm Coalition.

* *Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch also is spearheading opposition
to the TPP and is specifically urging all Americans to write to their US
senators requesting copies of the draft text of the treaty – a key
demand considering the extreme secrecy with which TPP negotiations have
been shrouded.

For details, see
[*http://action.citizen.org/p/dia/action/public/?action\_KEY=12152*](http://action.citizen.org/p/dia/action/public/?action_KEY=12152).
 Global Trade Watch has a more general background page on TPP at
[*http://www.citizen.org/TPP*](http://www.citizen.org/TPP),

[*With Genachowski’s exit, a chance for FCC to serve public, not telecom
giants?*](http://dsadc.org/with-genachowskis-exit-a-chance-for-fcc-to-serve-public-not-telecom-giants/)

Sunday, March 31st, 2013

*** The Washington Socialist*** **&lt;&gt; April 2013**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

When Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Chairman Julius Genachowski
announced his resignation from the Commission March 18, no one was
surprised.  Genachowski had openly discussed his intent to leave since
fall 2012.

And, no one is happier to see him leave than those of us who believe
that communication policies should be written to serve the public
interest.  Genachowski, a former venture capitalist, technology
executive and personal friend of President Obama, was not in the public
interest frame of mind in his three years as FCC head.

He never tried to hide his pro-business inclinations, which have even
been reported widely by the mainstream media.  A strong proponent of
wireless technologies, Genachowski advocates reallocating a sizable
portion of the broadcast airwaves (a public resource) for broadband and
cell phone signals.  That would shift substantial access to the airwaves
away from “the people” and to private telecomm companies for their use
in profit-generating services.  The telecommunications industry is
already the second highest revenue producing sector, right behind the
pharmaceutical companies.  Telecomm companies’ influence in politics is
already hegemonic.

Most recently, Genachowski advocated relaxing cross-ownership
regulations that keep one company from owning both newspapers and
television stations in the same market.  Right after he began to talk
about this behind the scenes last fall, one major local newspaper
reportedly began preparing to purchase a local TV station.  Genachowski
had let it be known that he planned to move the issue to a vote “early
in 2013,” but to date that has not happened.  He already had three votes
(on the five-member FCC), he said, one of them his.

Concerned about the possibility of such a vote, civil rights groups held
a closed-door meeting at the Urban League in December to discuss issues
and strategy around the cross-ownership situation.  A Howard University
colleague and I attended and shared our own concerns about such further
deregulation on the heels of a November 2012 FCC report showing that
minority and female broadcast ownership had declined through mergers and
acquisitions unleashed since the Telecomm Act of 1996.  African
Americans presently own only 1.7 percent of FM and 2.8 percent of AM
stations, a medium that served as a major source of information and
cohesion through Civil Rights days and since.  After that meeting many
of us present, including myself and my colleagues in the Howard Media
Group (HMG), submitted letters to the FCC asking for the cross-ownership
ban to remain intact.  To date, the issue remains on hold. (Note:  See
our HMG comment on this issue at
[*www.howardmediagroup.org*](http://www.howardmediagroup.org) under
“policies and resources.”)

Under Genachowski’s leadership, the FCC also refused to address the
court-mandated requirement to consider remedies to declining broadcast
ownership rates by women and minorities.  The Third Circuit Court in
Philadelphia had issued that *Prometheus II* ruling in July 2011,
requiring the FCC to consider more than 40 remedies that had been
submitted by civil rights groups like the Minority Media and
Telecommunications Council.  The FCC said that it had insufficient data
from current research to show which remedies would be best, but to date
the body has refused to commission those studies to obtain a baseline of
data to aid its decision making.

Journalists covering the FCC have been speculating about possible
successors in the months since November 2012 when the chairman began to
talk of leaving.  In March, my Howard Colleague Clint Wilson and I
submitted our letter to President Obama for one of those individuals,
Catherine Sandoval.  Sandoval is a law professor at University of Santa
Clara and a commissioner on the California Public Utilities Commission,
an appointment of Gov. Jerry Brown.  She has strong credentials:  BA
from Yale, MA from Oxford (the first Latina to win a Rhodes
scholarship), JD from Stanford, five years as an FCC attorney.  In her
academic life, she conducts legal research on minority and media issues
and she actively engages issues in media policy from a public interest
perspective.  The daughter of Mexican American parents who remains
involved with her community, she would bring a wealth of understanding
about what is needed to move telecommunications policy forward.  See
more at
[*http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catherine\_Sandoval*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catherine_Sandoval).

There are many ways to think about this moment of transition at the
FCC.  Among the things that I have been pondering these last few days is
that at least the FCC is finally on the mainstream news agenda!  Mostly
that incredibly important body has flown under the radar of reporters,
who have told me the FCC is “too complicated to report on.”  The result
of that has been a major lack of public awareness about how hugely
powerful media companies are shaping legislation, services, and our
daily communicative lives.  Neither have many socialists shown an
interest in communications policy.  The significant exception to this
has been Theresa Alt of the Ithaca DSA group, who began to cover federal
telecomm policy in her weekly public access TV show “DSA Presents” back
in the 1990s.  Members of the Ithaca DSA were also involved in
challenging local public radio stations, which, among other things,
refused to carry “Democracy Now!”

My personal hope is that our Metro-DC DSA group can turn a watchful eye
toward the Commission and begin to inform ourselves of its work toward
possible (at least occasional) involvement.
