***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from November 2013 Issue**

**Archived November 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Double Standards: The Imprisonment of the Cuban
Five*](http://dsadc.org/double-standards-the-imprisonment-of-the-cuban-five/)

Thursday, October 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2013**

*By Kurt Stand*

**Different truths**\
War in Syria was narrowly avoided when the lies that have led us, time
and time again, into war were recognized as such by larger than expected
numbers of people.  Less criticized was the double standard behind those
lies, the double standard by which we sit in judgment over others
without allowing ourselves to be judged.  Thus the horror of chemical
and nuclear arms, the horror of indiscriminate bombing, of the killing
of non-combatants, is only condemned as horrible by government and most
media when engaged in by those we label enemy.  They are not judged so
horrible, so random, so worthy of sanction when conducted by those our
government labels friend, or when a consequence of our own official
actions.  It is a double standard we can see domestically when the
protection given to prosecutorial misconduct, to police and – as seen in
George Zimmerman’s murder of Trayvon Martin – vigilante violence, is
contrasted with the relentless US criminal justice machine that
continues to put unending numbers of individuals behind lock and key,
often for non-violent charges.  And it is a double standard in evidence
when the fig leaf of national security and safety from terrorism is used
to justify military action abroad joined to domestic civil liberties
restrictions.

An example of the hypocrisy this entails is evident in the case of the
Cuban Five.  The FBI’s accusation: they threatened US national
security.  Their actions:  trying to protect Cuba from terrorist
bombings planned and financed by anti-Castro exiles in Miami.  The
consequence: Gerardo Hernandez, Ramon Labanino, Antonio Guerrero,
Fernando Gonzalez and Rene Gonzalez were arrested in Florida in 1998 on
espionage charges and handed prison terms ranging from 15 years (Rene
Gonzalez with that “short” sentence has been released) to the life
sentence imposed on Gerardo Hernandez.

Indeed they were Cuban intelligence officers, but the goal they sought
was not to prepare an attack on another country but rather to defend
their own society.  The sentences were so long because prosecutors were
not content to charge them with the relatively minor counts of being
unregistered agents of a foreign government and use of false identities
– charges of which they were guilty but would not have resulted in the
desired harsh sentences.  So prosecutors added the charge of “conspiracy
to gather and transmit national defense information” – a convenient
charge making conviction relatively easy, as it does not require the US
government to even pretend that they actually did gather or transmit
such information.

The practice of criminal charges becoming more draconian once defendants
use the courts to defend themselves is a common practice as anyone
familiar with how our legal system actually works can attest.  And it is
the reason Hernandez was given two life sentences.  More than a year
after his arrest he faced the additional charge of murder for the deaths
of two anti-Castro pilots shot down over Cuban territory, based on
political calculation not on any new evidence.  However one judges the
Cuban action, Hernandez neither shot them down, was part of the decision
to do so nor gave the order, but such facts are irrelevant when the goal
is punishment not justice.  And the amorphous nature of conspiracy
charges made proving unprovable facts completely unnecessary.

**An Anniversary**\
Marking the 15th anniversary of their incarceration, Stephen Kimber, the
Canadian author of *What Lies Across the Water: The Real Story of the
Cuban Five*, recently spoke about the case in Washington, DC and
Columbia, Maryland.  The tour, sponsored by the International Committee
to Defend the Cuban Five, was part of an effort to bring about greater
public awareness of the human costs of this particular “defense” of our
nation’s “national security.”  Kimber documents the activities of Cuban
intelligence apparatus, of the five who were condemned by our courts as
guilty, against threats that were anything but abstract. In the early
1990s there was a wave of hotel bombings in Cuba, bombings designed to
terrorize people visiting the country.  This was “strategic” terror,
directed at upending Cuba’s attempt to build a tourist industry as a
step toward reviving its economy — then at a low ebb, having lost its
key trading partners after the collapse of the Soviet Union while still
suffering from the tightening grip of the US blockade.  It was a time
too when those exile groups were stepping up their activities, ignoring
questions of national sovereignty, in the expectation that the Cuban
government would soon fall.  Thus private planes flew from Florida over
Cuban territory without authorization, an action illegal under US law,
but a law unenforced for two linked reasons. First, because the target
was a Cuban government that survived when other socialist governments
failed. Second, because the exile community in Miami, though still a
vehicle of US foreign policy, had also acquired power of its own.  Cold
War anti-Communism did not end with the end of the Cold War.

The fact that the US government was neither investigating nor
prosecuting those who engaged in illegal acts against Cuba from our own
soil was the reason for the dispatch of Cuban agents to Florida. They
were in no way an attempt to attack or subvert the US, an absurdity on
its face given the relative sizes, economic and military strength of the
two countries, and an absurdity given US global predominance and Cuban
isolation in the 1990s. It is also contrary to what the Cuban government
did.   As details of planned violent actions against Cuba were uncovered
based on evidence furnished by infiltration into exile groups, Cuban
authorities attempted to get the US government to intercede.

Kimber describes how Fidel Castro reached out to President Bill Clinton
through their mutual friend, novelist Gabriel Garcia Marquez, offering
to provide information on violent activities emanating from within the
US.  The Clinton Administration responded positively.  A team of FBI
agents came to Havana where they were provided with extensive
documentation of past and planned attacks.  Follow-up action was
promised by the FBI.  But the action taken was not what was expected for
the violent exile groups were left untouched.  Instead, several months
later, the Cuban agents were arrested.  In a sense the victim of
terrorist attacks was made to pay the price – another example of the
agencies of the powerful holding themselves to different standards than
those applied to all others.  It was a betrayal of trust that speaks to
complicity in anti-Cuban violence, and a betrayal that came at a
terrible human cost to the Cuban Five and their families.  And, not
incidentally, the arrests also prevented the realization of any
potential thawing of relations between the two countries represented by
anti-terrorist cooperation.

Further underlining the hypocrisy, the US government has given safe
haven to two of the most notorious of the anti-Cuban terrorists —
Orlando Bosch (who passed away, never prosecuted let alone confined, in
2011) and Luis Posada Carriles, (living still as a free man in Miami). 
Posada was implicated in the hotel bombings in the 1990s, and the two of
them were implicated in the bombing of a Cuban civilian airliner in
1976, killing all 73 aboard.  But when such actions are taken against an
“enemy,” they become acceptable or, at least, accepted.  Approximately
3,000 Cubans have lost their lives in bombing attacks over the past
decades, attacks our official double standard refuses to acknowledge.

As might be expected of a case such as this, numerous jurists and bodies
ranging from the UN Commission on Human Rights to Amnesty International
have condemned the trial of the Cuban Five as unfair, the sentences
vindictive.  Appeals continue, however – appeals strengthened by ever
new revelations of just how unfair. It’s been discovered that federal
government funds were used to pay reporters in Miami during the trial to
further inflame public opinion and influence the unsequestered jury
members — payments which neither the Five, their attorneys nor the judge
were informed of at the time.  Legal actions on their behalf are joined
to attempts to build a broad-based international campaign to win their
release from prison and quicken their return to their homes and families
in Cuba.  From May 30-June 4, numerous public events were held in
Washington DC as part of “Five Days for the Five” with speakers
including Dolores Huerta, co-founder of the United Farm Workers Union
and an Honorary Chair of DSA, former US Attorney General Ramsay Clark,
Angela Davis, Danny Glover, Rev. Graylan Hagler, the late Saul Landau
and many others in events to strengthen the public movement on their
behalf.  Solidarity actions have been especially strong in Latin
America  where most governments have called for freedom for the Five,
and in Africa where memory of Cuba’s role in opposing apartheid is
well-remembered.  In Europe too there has been much action – 116 Members
of Parliament in Britain signed a statement earlier this year demanding
that the imprisoned Cubans be allowed family visits, a right frequently
denied.

And actions continue.  On the fifth of each month, some public figure
writes an open letter calling for freedom for the Five; this October 5th
that initiative was expanded through an organized campaign to get as
many individuals as possible to e-mail, call, or write the White House,
demanding that President Obama free the four remaining Cuban prisoners.

**What is to be done**\
Yet after five years of imprisonment the case is still too little known
in the United States, and support for the Five still not strong enough
to gain their release.  Part of the difficulty lies in the success of
anti-Cuban policies that have made a neighbor 90 miles from our shore an
unknown to most.  On June 3, as part of the “Five Days for the Five,” a
labor solidarity event took place at the Local 140 American Postal
Workers union hall in Northeast DC.  Canadian and British unionists
talked about the success they have had in bringing their respective
labor movements around to support demands to free the unjustly
imprisoned Cubans.  It wasn’t easy and the task is far from complete,
but more progress has been made in those and other countries’ labor
movements than in the US for one significant reason:  Other countries
have diplomatic relations with Cuba, allowing for visits, allowing – for
example – family members of the imprisoned five to talk about the case
giving a human dimension.  Here such talks are impossible. Some of those
family members not granted visas to come to the US to visit loved ones
(the ban British parliamentarians criticized); those who are allowed can
only visit, unable to speak to the press or the public.  So too,
delegations of Cuban unionists can travel to other countries but are
banned from our shores – and approval for US citizens to go to Cuba is
difficult and potentially liable to sanction.  Local 140 President Dena
Brisco talked of her trip to Cuba and how it gave her new insights.  But
the nature of the ban makes such visits themselves too infrequent,
possible on too small a scale.

Thus the question of why persists – why government policy has been so
consistently hostile to Cuba since the 1959 revolution, why the need for
Cuba to send agents here to monitor the acts of its violent opponents,
why those agents when arrested were given such draconian sentences, why
those culpable of violence were left free.  Cuban socialism in its
strengths and weaknesses, in its changes and developments is simply an
unknown reality to the vast majority of people in Florida or Washington,
DC or anywhere else in our country.   Kimber in his presentation noted
that when he began writing his book; he expected others to have already
written about the case – then discovered to his surprise that no
detailed book on the subject had appeared in the US. No longer
surprised, he then discovered how difficult it has been to get the book
reviewed and sold here.

For all our claims to be an “Open Society,” we can be pretty closed when
it comes to allowing the voices to be heard of those who are designated
as enemy.  It is the same logic that allows US intelligence agencies to
monitor private conversations around the world – and act aggrieved when
that monitoring is publicly revealed.  Not just aggrieved, as indicated
by the sentence imposed on Chelsea Manning and the attempted
prosecutions of Julian Assange and Edward Snowden.  The lack of
information about Cuba, about the Cuban Five is part and parcel of the
way in which the American public is kept uniformed about the purposes
and consequences of US foreign policy as a whole.

That consequence is evident on Guantanamo, a piece of Cuban territory
leased indefinitely to the US when the country was a virtual colony and
now a land of legal limbo where human beings are held indefinitely. 
There too human beings are caught in a vise that is all too often
ignored because cardboard images replace the fuller understanding of the
persons, of the families, impacted by incarceration. British journalist
Victoria Brittain puts in her book *Shadow Lives* personalities and
lives that our hypocritical war on terror refuses to recognize,
providing “a glimpse into the world of a number of women who have had
their lives shattered by the myths and fable generated by the war on
terror …” Giving human dimension to those otherwise seen as cardboard
figures is itself a challenge to the way official policies of war and
repression are justified and rationalized.

The Cubans who were fighting terrorist attacks against their own
countries and those imprisoned in Guantanamo – many, though not all, who
certainly viewed terror as an appropriate means of struggle – represent
different world views, different concepts of how to change the world. 
But what they share is suffering the fate of a double standard that
justifies the politics of empire and civil liberties abuse in the name
of a democracy that is itself ever more restricted. And we just survived
an attempt to have our rights, and indeed our freedom, even more
restricted, as seen by the recent attempt by a minority of a minority to
impose its will on the whole country by shutting down the federal
government.

There is a connection to be made there – a connection between repressive
global politics, the use of courts as vehicles of political and social
repression and attacks on popular government.  During the labor meeting
on Cuba, one of the speakers from the floor made the point – not
recognized nearly enough — that civil liberties is a working class issue
which needs to be defended as such.  The fate of Gerardo Hernandez,
Ramon Labanino, Antonio Guerrero, Fernando Gonzalez and Rene Gonzalez
may appear distant from the needs of people who are struggling with
housing costs, trying to find or hold onto jobs, figuring out how to
meet health care needs or address pension worries.  But the expansion of
laws that criminalize nonviolent behavior, that make prosecutions
easier, sentences longer and appeals more difficult contribute to the
climate that has weakened labor organization, weakened movements of
public protest, and weakened the left. It is not a step removed, it is
the other side of the same struggle.

Conspiracy laws, in particular, are laws that criminalize by association
and have been used to both repress individual rights and to marginalize
groups and organizations deemed objectionable by those in power.  The
criminal justice system has devastated African-American and Latino
communities, has created a climate of fear in immigrant communities, and
has served as tool of political repression as seen with the fate of the
Occupy movement. Meanwhile that system has ignored the practices that
have shipped jobs overseas, created financial havoc, taken families’
homes, jobs, futures – all practices akin to the use/misuse of law that
enables employers to violate labor protections with impunity while
making workers’ rights ever less likely to be enforced.

**Solidarity**\
“They \[the Cuban Five\] have already had to endure the most difficult
conditions: solitary confinement, restrictions on communication and
family visits, loneliness, and psychological torture.  It is cruel when
there is a family loss and one cannot be present – and \[when one\] must
also not show sorrow, because in all spheres \[of life\] caution must be
exercised.

“The US authorities have denied me a visa to travel in the US to visit
my husband.  The argument is always that I am a security risk.  … So
long as there is no definitive solution to the case, we demand at least
the right to have regular visits.  But more important than the visa
question is that they finally be allowed to return home.”

Andriana Perez – Gerardo Hernandez’ wife – has become a global leader in
the solidarity campaign.  She made those remarks while in Germany and
they serve as a reminder of the hurts inherent to the lives of those
imprisoned, a reminder that while the campaign to free the Cuban Five
should be seen as part of the broader fight to retake and remake our
society, it should also be seen as a profoundly human movement calling
for justice for victims of injustice. Their story, after all is a story
also of families, of children growing up without their fathers, of loved
ones separated by miles and bars, of celebrations and funerals and daily
events missed  – of people working to keep hope alive, to remain engaged
with the world and with life and with each other.  It is a struggle that
deserves respect and support on those terms alone.

The fate of Howard Wallace, a Black Panther activist arrested in 1972,
and allowed three days of freedom before his death from cancer at age 72
after having spent 40 years in solitary confinement based on unproven
charges is a fate that should never be repeated.   And so the importance
of solidarity efforts on behalf of Leonard Peltier, on behalf of Mumia
Abu Jamal, on behalf of lesser known victims of official injustice – and
on behalf of the Cuban Five.   Such campaigns can be long and seem
hopeless, but hope departs only when people turn their eyes away instead
of acting on what they see.  Perhaps it is best to end with word of the
late Leonard Weinglass, an attorney for Daniel Ellsburg and many others,
his last work being working to win freedom for the Five:

“The worst thing that can happen to anyone in the American system of
justice is to be alone.  Solidarity is necessary, not to intimidate the
Court.  But to indicate that the world is watching and the law should be
followed.”

Solidarity is the means by which we can create a single standard of
justice, can build a just society, a just world.

**Sources:**

Stephen Kimber, *What Lies Across the Water: The Real Story of the Cuban
Five,* Fernwood Publishing, 2013.  This book provides a history of what
happened, a biography of those involved in detail and with honesty that
allows all to make up their own minds about what took place and why.

Arthur Heitzer, “Open Letter to President Obama asking to ‘make things
right’ and Free the Five,” on-line posting in September by the
International Committee for the Freedom of the Cuban Five, provides the
best short breakdown of the case.  Heitzer, a civil rights and labor
lawyer in Milwaukee, is chair of the National Lawyers Guild subcommittee
on Cuba.   His statement can be accessed at: [*www.thecubanFive.org
*](http://dsadc.org/2013/10/www.thecubanfive.org) (this website is
regularly updated with information about the Five, and about on-going
legal developments and solidarity campaigns).

The Leonard Weinglass quote is from a brochure put out by the
International Committee (and echoes words he said to me).

The  Andria Perez quote is from an interview, “Sie soled nach Hause
kommen,” (They must come home,”), *Junge Welt*, October 4, 2013.

Victoria Brittain, *Shadow Lives: The Forgotten Women of the War On
Terror*, Pluto Press 2013 – a moving and unflinching look at the reality
of Guantanamo, the reality that injustice and brutality is always wrong
no matter to whom applied.  The quote is from the first page of her
book.

Dan Smith, “Fifteen years of cruel separation,” *Morning Star* (a
British newspaper), January 21, 2013 – Smith is the Cuba Solidarity
campaigns officer in Britain and wrote about the parliamentary campaign
there.  Other information came from the Five Days for Five events and
the International Committee for the Freedom of the Cuban Five website.

[*GOOD READS: selected articles, radical and
otherwise*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-selected-articles-radical-and-otherwise/)

Thursday, October 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2013**

Selected articles from other publications.

Amy Dean, posted by national DSA in October, on why the revival of US
labor may come from nonunion workers…
[*http://www.dsausa.org/revival\_of\_us\_labor?fb\_action\_ids=184625861725581&fb\_action\_types=og.likes*](http://www.dsausa.org/revival_of_us_labor?fb_action_ids=184625861725581&fb_action_types=og.likes)

Some comments on the DSA Activist listserve lately raise the question:
Why don’t we in DSA spend more time describing and extolling the best
side of the Nordic social democracies, giving them as examples of what
we would imagine for at least transitional socialist *societies—*not
just governments, which can come and go, but *societies* where social,
public expectations are positive, not reflexively mistrustful or
fearful. Oddly or maybe not so oddly, a mid-October column by the
literary critic Stanley Fish in the *New York Times* – riffing on an
interesting-sounding book – rings some of these same changes.
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/15/opinion/fish-love-and-politics.html?ref=opinion*](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/15/opinion/fish-love-and-politics.html?ref=opinion)

The great shutdown is finally over (at least, as of mid-October) – but
Joe Schwartz, writing in *Talking Union,* reminds us of what critical
human needs programs are still on the chopping block and how ready some
of those energized-by-victory Democrats still are to go along with
cutting them. Danger remains.
[*https://talkingunion.wordpress.com/2013/10/18/the-government-is-open-now-fight-for-a-just-economy/*](https://talkingunion.wordpress.com/2013/10/18/the-government-is-open-now-fight-for-a-just-economy/)

As always, Sam Pizzigati’s *Too Much* blog exposes excess and details
remedies (the more of the first there is, the more of the second are
needed… whatta surprise…) The US is number one in inequality, also no
surprise, but the fresh numbers bring new amazement.
[*http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html*](http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html)

For policy wonks (aren’t we all?) a discussion via Kurt and Lisa Stand\*
of how the argument over the role of government v. a private sector gets
complicated by the way social solutions get put together – often they
are adaptations of existing failures, rather than new inventions from
scratch. The healthcare.gov website might immediately come to mind. The
idea of a “kludgeocracy” may be new to you but you’ll recognize it
easily…\
[*http://digbysblog.blogspot.com/2013/10/yes-new-democrat-dogma-is-to-blame.html*](http://digbysblog.blogspot.com/2013/10/yes-new-democrat-dogma-is-to-blame.html)

And then there’s the role of ideas…. Chris Hedges inverts Marx; when the
ruling ideas of the corporate class have become totally discredited,
revolution (maybe peaceful, maybe not) is inevitable even if the surface
looks undisturbed. We’re approaching that point now, he suggests, as the
vast middle has lost faith in capitalist tenets. From the interesting
“Nation of Change” site via Carl Davidson and Andy Feeney:
[*http://www.nationofchange.org/our-invisible-revolution-1383056375*](http://www.nationofchange.org/our-invisible-revolution-1383056375)

And still more on the AFL-CIO convention from *Labor Notes* by Bill
Fletcher Jr. and Jeff Crosby; a generally positive view:
[*http://www.labornotes.org/2013/10/viewpoint-afl-cio-convention-repositions-unions-speak-all-workers*](http://www.labornotes.org/2013/10/viewpoint-afl-cio-convention-repositions-unions-speak-all-workers)

What if we look at the climate prospects and decide, or realize, that we
really are fucked – not centuries from now, but decades? What are the
implications for the Left? Not a joke question. A *Jacobin* essay by
Alyssa Battistoni poses the question and offers a few answers. Specific
enough? Take a look.
[*http://jacobinmag.com/2013/06/back-to-no-future/*](http://jacobinmag.com/2013/06/back-to-no-future/)

The Brit standup comedian Russell Brand is a frequent brawling voice on
politics, and he used his invite as a guest editor at the *New
Statesman* to lay out a manifesto that’s attracted a lot of comment:
[*http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/10/russell-brand-on-revolution*](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/10/russell-brand-on-revolution)

Naomi Klein, whose big eco-rad manifesto attracted a great deal of
attention in *The Nation* several years ago, had a piece Oct. 29 in the
*New Statesman* (maybe the one Russell Brand guest-edited!) about the
inability of a capitalist system to adapt to the political needs of a
climate change solution. The proximate protagonist is another young
scientist-writer (see Alyssa Battistoni, above) who asks the musical
question: is the earth fucked? Are we fucked?

[*http://www.newstatesman.com/2013/10/science-says-revolt*](http://www.newstatesman.com/2013/10/science-says-revolt)

We mention in the opening email that national DSA has selected some
strategy documents to be reviewed and updated in the light of the latest
conformations of capitalism’s crisis. Jose Gutierrez wrote about “Toward
Freedom” and Andy Feeney wrote about “Toward Freedom” and the latest
(1998) version of “Where We Stand.” Here is one more link to that whole
collection, on the national DSA site.
[*http://www.dsausa.org/socialist\_strategy*](http://www.dsausa.org/socialist_strategy)
The Metro DC DSA local will also email the documents to you on request
as a single PDF. Contact
[*jagfeb2002@yahoo.com*](mailto:jagfeb2002@yahoo.com) or
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com)

*\*Post updated Nov. 3 2013: a discussion via Kurt and Lisa Stand*

[*Government Shutdown Shows Need for DC
Statehood*](http://dsadc.org/government-shutdown-shows-need-for-dc-statehood/)

Thursday, October 31st, 2013

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2013**

*By Bill Mosley*

Much of the media’s coverage of the 16-day October government shutdown
focused on the closure of national parks, monuments and museums, whether
House Speaker John Boehner could induce the far-right members of his
caucus to follow him, and whether President Obama would compromise and
accept modifications to the new federal health-care program. As the
standoff dragged on into a second and third week, the parallel story of
whether Congress would bring financial ruin on the country by refusing
to extend the federal debt ceiling came to the fore. Much was made of
the closure of federal museums and monuments and their impact on the
tourist trade. There was, however, another local angle to this tale of
federal Washington’s dysfunction: the impact of the shutdown on the
District of Columbia, the real city of 630,000 people often overshadowed
by the often-unreal antics of the national government within its
boundaries.

Due to the Constitution’s specifying that “Congress shall have power …
\[t\]o exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever” over the
federal district housing the seat of government, Congress must approve
the District’s budget every year before DC can spend any funds, as if it
were a federal agency. This is despite the fact that, like nearly all
states and cities, the vast majority of the District government’s
funding – about three-fourths – comes from taxes raised by the District
government itself – income taxes, sales and excise taxes, and the other
levies. Nevertheless, because Congress controls the District’s
legislation, DC requires congressional approval to spend even its own
locally raised tax money. In effect, Congress is the schoolyard bully
who steals a child’s lunch money and says that maybe he’ll give it back
if the victim asks for it nicely enough.

When Oct. 1 arrived and there was no approved budget – for federal
agencies or the DC government – DC Mayor Vincent C. Gray, rather than
bow to Congress and close shop, scrambled to keep the District
government running. Because heads of federal agencies have discretion to
declare certain employees “essential,” Gray decided that all DC
government employees fit this description and kept them all on the job.
To pay their salaries and the operational costs of the local government,
he dipped into a “rainy-day fund” that could keep the District operating
for perhaps two or three weeks.

Gray also went public with his frustration over the District’s
entanglement in a dispute to which it should not have been party, and on
Oct. 9 held a press conference outside the U.S. Capitol to demand that
Congress free DC’s budget from the impasse. By that time the
Republican-controlled House, as part of its strategy to gain public
favor by selectively approving funding for a few popular programs – and
holding the rest hostage in exchange for concessions on Obamacare – had
passed a budget for the District. But the Democratic-controlled Senate
insisted that the entire government be funded at once and without
conditions, and refused to vote on a DC-only bill. By coincidence, at
the time Gray was holding his press conference, Senate Majority Leader
Harry Reid was holding his own media powwow nearby. Gray, spotting Reid,
walked over to him and, according to the *Washington Post*, said in the
presence of the reporters, “Sir, we are not a department of the
government. We’re simply trying to be able to spend our own money.” To
which Reid replied, “I’m on your side, don’t screw it up, okay?”

Gray continued his offensive the following evening with a public meeting
at Friendship Public Charter School in Southeast DC. With several
hundred DC residents in attendance, he discussed the difficulties the
District would face if Congress did not approve its funding promptly. He
said the District had already missed a \$90 million payment to Medicaid
providers due to lack of money, and more cutbacks would be necessary
within days as the reserve fund emptied.

Fortunately, the Tea Party faction caved on Oct. 16, and DC once again
had full access to its own funds. And Congress, which took no pains to
prevent disruption of the District’s government in October, threw the
capital city a bone: DC could spend its funds through next September,
although the federal government may face another budget crisis in
January. That DC should consider itself “fortunate” to be able to spend
its own money for another 11 months before once again throwing itself on
the mercy of Congress aptly illustrates the absurdity of the District’s
colonial status.

Almost since DC gained limited home rule in 1974, District citizens have
fought, lobbied and pleaded for the two essential features of American
democracy that all other US citizens enjoy but DC residents are denied:
voting representation in Congress, and what can be called “states’
rights:” local control over local legislation and spending. The voting
representation struggle has absorbed the most energy and produced the
most ink, from the failed attempt to amend the Constitution in the 1970s
and 1980s to the more recent, and equally frustrated, attempt to gain
voting representation by simple legislation.

The push for legislative and budget autonomy, while lower-burning than
the voting representation fight, has nevertheless been regarded as of
equal importance by many DC residents and activists. The lack of
autonomy was especially deeply felt in 1997 when Congress, largely to
punish the District for re-electing Marion Barry as mayor, stripped the
elected government of nearly all its rights and vested authority in the
congressionally appointed Control Board. Citizen anger over this insult
to democracy led to a surge of activism in support of defending and
expanding home rule. One product of this new activism was a bus caravan
to the North Carolina district of Sen. Lauch Faircloth, the architect of
the 1997 measure. The riders’ work in educating Faircloth’s mostly
working-class constituents was certainly a factor in the senator’s
defeat for re-election the following year. Another product of the 1997
uprising was the founding of the Stand Up! for Democracy in DC Coalition
(also known as Free DC) which became the standard-bearer for the most
comprehensive solution to DC’s disenfranchisement: statehood. (The local
chapter of Democratic Socialists of America was one of the founding
organizations of the coalition).

As advocates have argued, only statehood will confer full citizenship
equal to that of all other US citizens – since, as even a cursory
reading of the Constitution makes clear, the United States is a
federation of states, and full citizenship flows from being the resident
of a state. Any law or constitutional amendment to remedy DC’s
disenfranchisement, short of full statehood, would confer only
citizenship with an asterisk.

This points out a flaw in the DC referendum, approved last April by DC
voters, that essentially declares budget autonomy unilaterally and while
daring Congress to shoot it down. While the vote represents a feisty
middle finger thrust at Capitol Hill, even DC’s own attorney general has
declared it of dubious legality, and Congress could overturn it at any
time.

In the end, only statehood will grant the full voting rights, full
legislative autonomy and full respect that the District deserves and
needs. While procedurally easy to attain – it requires only a majority
vote in both houses of Congress and the signature of the President – it
has been a struggle politically. It has come to a floor vote only once,
in the House of Representatives in 1993, and lost by a wide margin.
Clearly, the statehood movement has more work to do to educate the
public about why DC needs and deserves statehood – not only the
residents of the states with voting representatives, but those living in
DC as well. Only a stronger, more visible and more aggressive movement
will capture the attention of the nation – and prevent an inevitable
replay of the outrageous events of October 2013.

For more information on the DC statehood movement, visit
[*www.freedc.org*](http://www.freedc.org).

[*Maryland looks at formal state body on defense
transition*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-looks-at-formal-state-body-on-defense-transition/)

Thursday, October 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2013**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Progressive groups and some like-minded legislators in Maryland are
pushing a bill for the January 2014 session to create an economic
futures commission to retain and expand the state’s high-pay
manufacturing base and jobs –  especially as military outlays are
projected to decline.

The state would attempt, through this group, systematic planning to not
only ride out but benefit from the decline in defense spending likely in
the next decade. Preparing the state’s workers and their skills for
alternative production – including specific green energy manufacture and
creation – tops the agenda.

At a meeting in Columbia Oct. 30, activists from around the state,
officials from unions and progressive NGOs and a legislative sponsor
heard more.

Jean Athey, chair of [*Fund Our Communities
Maryland,*](http://ourfunds.org/) outlined the state’s dependency on
military spending and the higher economic stimulus resulting from
federal dollars devoted to non-military projects such as infrastructure,
health care and education.

The draft bill’s preamble cites a study suggesting that in 2013 alone
the “sequestration” budget cuts will cost the state nearly 30,000 jobs
and \$2.5 billion-plus in Gross State Product.

A panel discussion followed, including bill co-sponsor Sen. Roger Manno
of Montgomery County’s 19^th^ Dist. and state AFL-CIO president Fred
Mason. Mason said that Maryland, through lack of planning, was unable to
benefit from the 60,000 new jobs resulting from the last round of base
closings, and wound up having to recruit workers from New Jersey,
original loser of many of the jobs.

The legislative effort for the bill would be “an uphill fight” but a
“fight worth having,” Mason said, because it would “get citizens to look
at their future more strategically.” Planning would help the state
“escape the whims of corporations that put profits over people.”

The stated goal: “…to develop plans and policies to ensure a competitive
advantage for Maryland as Federal military spending declines.”  The
draft bill actually contains the phrase “industrial policy,” a term
nearly eradicated by the Reagan-era elevation of laissez-faire
capitalism as policy.

Fund Our Communities Maryland’s main mission is to reduce Pentagon
spending and divert that money to human needs, at state and local as
well as national levels.

However, Manno, who will co-sponsor the bill in the Senate along with
fellow Montgomery Sens. Richard Madaleno and Jamie Raskin, said as
written the bill would “not be a heavy lift” in the legislature because
it avoids direct confrontation with defense industry interests, instead
focusing on job creation and countering  job loss. He appealed for early
and wide support from activists.

“We need a caucus,” Manno said, “to be strategic how we roll out a new
economy” so that progressive and union interests are not “pitted against
each other.”

Mason reported that the state AFL-CIO had passed a resolution in favor
of examining economic conversion Oct. 26. The resolution noted “growing
need for programs of economic conversion” and said “appropriate planning
and foresight is needed” for worker transition as the state’s job
sources change.

An earlier draft of the AFL-CIO resolution had explicitly endorsed, and
promised support for, legislation for the Commission for Maryland’s
Future by name because “there is no state planning body” to take on the
task. The draft also promised an internal AFL-CIO working group to
encourage and educate on the matter at the county and community level.
That language did not survive; instead the operative phrase was that the
Maryland AFL-CIO “recognizes the seriousness of these issues,” and that
labor representatives on existing state and local area Workforce
Investment Boards are “encourage\[d\] … to use their voice to ensure
that these issues are addressed.”

The dozens of members of the “Commission for Maryland’s Future” would,
in the draft bill, include representatives from labor, peace,
environmental and economic policy organizations. Administrative support
would come from the committee’s inclusion of top officials from major
state agencies and task forces overseeing economic and workforce
development, climate change and sustainable growth, STEM education and
manufacturing competitiveness. Nonprofit NGOs and advocacy groups are
also well represented, at least in the draft.

The strategies to be sought by the commission include “the coordination
of economic development policy with capital investment in both public
and private sectors” and “the diversification or conversion of
defense-related jobs with an emphasis on encouraging environmentally
sustainable and civilian-product manufacturing jobs.”

And on the to-do list: “the diversification or conversion of
defense-related jobs; … planning for and development of the state’s
manufacturing base; … creation and implementation of an *industrial
policy* \[emphasis added\] for the state that is environmentally
friendly; and … the creation of a business climate in the state
conducive to long-term planning and capital investment.”

A
[*study*](http://www.ciponline.org/images/uploads/publications/Milex_Jobs_Fact_Sheet_0212_Update.pdf)
at the Political Economic Research Institute at U-Mass Amherst by
defense scholar William Hartung demonstrated that military manufacturing
jobs contribute less to economic prosperity than do job in manufacturing
for civilian consumption – because the civilian products cycle through
the civilian economy rather than being shunted off into the sealed-off
world of military use.

Hartung notes that “spending on clean energy production produces one and
one-half times more jobs \[than military manufacturing\] and  spending
on education creates more than two and one-half times more jobs.”

As important, Hartung says, is who benefits from military contracting.
It’s not the workers. “… more of the military dollar goes to capital, as
opposed to labor, than do the expenditures in the other job categories.
For example, only 1.5% of the price of each F-35 Joint Strike Fighter
pays for the labor costs involved in “manufacturing, fabrication, and
assembly” work at the plane’s main production facility in Fort Worth,
Texas.2 A full 85% of the F-35s costs go for overhead, not for jobs
actually fabricating and assembling the aircraft.”

A similar transition commission was established by law in Connecticut
earlier this year, but Maryland would be a pioneer in this project, said
Miriam Pemberton, a defense scholar at the [*Institute for Policy
Studies*](http://www.ips-dc.org/) who is advising Fund Our Communities
Maryland on the issue, and who was on the Oct. 30 meeting’s panel.

She suggested that activists and legislators avoid some pitfalls by
taking testimony from industry representatives, examine the history of
conversion efforts – which show some successes – and focus on the most
promising alternatives, such as clean energy to combat climate change.

Connecticut’s bill reads like a more traditional industrial-policy bill,
with a focus on state intervention to stimulate high-paying
manufacturing employment. An acknowledgment that defense industry
declines should be countered by creation of green jobs comes only as an
amendment to the original text.

One potential resource, Pemberton said, is actually in the Pentagon –
the Office of Economic Adjustment, which is shifting its focus from base
closings to the disruptions that cuts in military spending can bring to
local communities. Noncompetitive grants are available to communities,
such as counties, that can demonstrate dependence on defense jobs and
spending at levels as low as 3% of the total local economy.

Pemberton noted with resignation that federal legislative action on
conversion was probably unlikely given congressional gridlock, and said
in discussion after the meeting that similar state action is under
consideration in Ohio, Michigan and Missouri, but that Maryland looked
like the next state after Connecticut to get a bill in the process.

 

[*NATIONAL CONVENTION NOTES: Setting Socialist Strategy in an Age of
Austerity*](http://dsadc.org/national-convention-notes-setting-socialist-strategy-in-an-age-of-austerity/)

Thursday, October 31st, 2013

*** The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2013**

*By Andy Feeney*

How should DSA position itself to pursue democratic socialist goals in
an era of deepening economic austerity? 

What should our organization’s key priorities be as we go about
rebuilding a democratic left over the next two years? 

Who should we attempt to ally ourselves with as we go about trying to
form – or many would say, re-establish – a democratic and progressive
coalition for change?

How do we do all that at a time when the Tea Party right apparently
still controls the House of Representatives, Republican governors and
gerrymandered legislatures in many states are curtailing labor rights
and imposing new voting restrictions on minority Americans, and chronic
budget gridlock threatens the future of federal spending programs to
help the poor, the unemployed and the disabled — not to mention Social
Security and Medicare?

 

These were some of the major issues that democratic socialists from
around the country grappled with as we met at a unionized Hilton hotel
in Emeryville, California on Oct. 24-Oct. 27 for DSA’s biennial national
convention.

 As one of three delegates from the Metro DC chapter of DSA to attend
the convention, I confess to having been too jet-lagged to attend many
of the many workshops at the event.  However, I was very impressed – far
more than I’d expected to be, in fact – by Joe Schwartz’s presentation
at the Saturday morning plenary session on Oct. 26 on “The Role of a
Socialist Organization in an Era of Austerity.”  I think Joe’s
presentation and the breakout discussion panels that followed it did a
good job of summarizing many of the challenges facing democratic
socialists and the U.S. left as a whole in the coming years.

 One central theme of Joe’s vision, as he indicated at a Socialist Salon
here in Washington some months ago, is the challenge to traditional New
Deal liberalism in the US by what leftwing analysts generally called
“neo-liberalism,” which is basically equivalent to libertarian-style,
free-market fundamentalism. 

As most DSA members are doubtless aware, but as some newer recruits to
democratic socialism may not understand (given the way that words are
employed in American public schools and on the  mass media),  “liberal”
as neo-liberal thinkers define the word is essentially equivalent to
favoring “liberty” – the two words are from the same Latin root. 

But the so-called Classical Liberals of the 19^th^ century were most
determined to extend “liberty” to capitalist enterprises, and modern
neo-liberals and the libertarian economists they follow are the same. 
Their “liberal” vision of a totally free capitalist marketplace
therefore would sound the death knell for the “liberal” New Deal
programs established in the 1930s and for the civil rights laws and
environmental protection laws that many liberal Democrats in the US
supported in the 1960s and 1970s.

As Joe noted in his plenary session talk on the challenges facing
socialists in the current age of austerity, “Neo-liberalism is a class
project to redistribute power and wealth in America – upwards.”  And it
has enjoyed remarkable political success over the past several decades,
to the point where 20% of this country’s households are doing very well
financially, but perhaps 80% of the working people in the US are
struggling to make ends meet. 

Neo-liberal politics as it has been pursued mostly by Republican
presidents and members of Congress, but with ample help from so-called
moderate Democrats, has helped ensure that since the late 1970s, the
pre-tax income of the richest 1% of Americans has risen from about 8.7%
of the total GDP to some 23%. 

 Meanwhile, as Joe noted in his plenary address, inflation-adjusted
wages of men without school degrees have plunged by 12%, and only
through a massive influx of women into the workforce has the median
household income been able to increase by about 17%, at a time when
total economic output in the country more than doubled.

 Largely as a result of neo-liberal and anti-regulatory politics,
coupled with unequal cuts in income tax rates and state and federal
budget cuts aimed at the least fortunate, unemployment and
under-employment in the US have been rising, and at the same time many
Baby Boomers have lost the protection that they once enjoyed of
guaranteed pension payments in their retirement years.

Meanwhile the deindustrialization of the American economy has pushed
many older white workers out of factory jobs into much lower-paying jobs
in the service sector, or into surviving on disability payments.   And
despite some very impressive gains by the black middle class since the
1970s, many lower-income African American men have been hurt even worse
by deindustrialization than their white counterparts, and have been
pushed into surviving on welfare benefits, working in the underground
economy, or spending years on end in prison.

 Under these circumstances, Joe argued in his talk on socialist
strategy, American leftists need to be fighting not only to preserve the
public sector in the U.S. economy, but to expand it.  We need to fight
against the divisions that neo-liberal politicians are trying to create
between the middle class and the poor and among Americans of different
racial backgrounds and national origins.

 We further need to fight against the ongoing de-unionizing of the
American workplace and the deregulation of industry, while understanding
and strongly contesting the right-wing idea that somehow, the richest
capitalist nation on earth can’t afford a strong and humane public
sector.

 Socialists and our progressive allies should “go beyond saving Social
Security to expanding Social Security,” Joe urged delegates at the
convention, and given the high and rising productivity of US capitalist
workplaces, we should demand and win paid parental and maternity leave
for all workers.

 Over the next few years democratic socialists also should be pushing
hard for the creation of new jobs, especially government-provided jobs,
through federal and state programs to promote green industry, build and
improve mass transit systems, and address a huge crisis in decaying
public infrastructure systems around the country.

Two other major crises Joe mentioned in his plenary presentation were
the burgeoning burden of student loan debt, on the one hand, and a huge
shortfall in the public sector budgets for funding the pension and
retirement benefits of existing public sector workers.

To address national problems like these on a scale where actual
victories are possible, Joe further argued, “We have to build a new
rainbow coalition” in the U.S., one that will “build solidarity without
neglecting differences” among the many different communities that are
currently suffering from neo-liberal austerity.

Joe is on record, along with a majority of the National Political
Committee and the DSA national office, as calling for DSA at a national
level to make the campaign to reform the student debt our only
“supported” priority over the next two years.  

That is, they hope for the DSA national office to devote its limited
staff resources and financial resources to the student debt campaign
alone, partly on the grounds that focusing on student debt will enable
DSA to recruit younger members who can stave off the collapse of this
organization when older DSA members – at present, more than half of the
total DSA membership is near or past retirement age – are forced to
abandon politics in years ahead due to old age, disability and death.

 Advocates for this focus on student debt hope that by devoting major
organizational resources to recruiting young people without explicitly
socialist politics to DSA, and by educating them and their often
financially beleaguered parents about the total extent of U.S. student
loan debt and how it is feeding the profits of the private financial
system, democratic socialists can build a greater public awareness of
the capitalist contradictions in the banking system, as well as the need
for the education of young Americans to be removed from the auspices of
private, profit-seeking corporations and recognized as a necessary
social program of a humane and democratic society.

Another critical focus of Joe’s vision in his plenary address on
socialist strategy, and a key point of a national DSA priorities
document that delegates debated and approved on the last day of the
convention, is greater DSA involvement in the immigrant rights and
immigration reform movement. 

The recruitment of younger college-age and post-college age people
through the student debt campaign, and the recruitment of young and
older immigrants through progressive involvement in the immigrant rights
struggle, will together help DSA to establish the foundations for the
next American left, as Joe and many others on the National Political
Committee see it. 

However, it became clear in Joe’s plenary talk and in the panel
discussions that followed it that at a local level, DSA members are
expected to remain engaged in many other local and national struggles
against austerity and neo-liberalism. Not only students and immigrants,
but low-wage workers generally, aging folk facing cutbacks, women and
minorities, and union or union-recruitable white men could be parts of a
possible anti-austerity coalition of the left

A final point that Joe’s plenary address mentioned, and that also is
included in the priorities resolution that convention delegates approved
on Sunday, Oct. 27, was that as we fight against the austerity politics
of the right, democratic socialists also should be engaging in strong
public education efforts both about the flaws in neo-liberalism and in
capitalism as it exists today, and concerning possible socialist
alternatives to the system.

 For the past several months, there has been something of a national
debate among some long-time DSA activists over the relative strengths of
(1) an “organize, organize” strategy to fight the neo-liberal fights – a
strategy that will necessitate DSA, with its relatively small numbers,
entering into practical alliances with many activists who do not have an
explicitly socialist understanding of the problems, and who are working
for liberal reforms and not wholesale economic transformation to fix
those problems, and (2) a rather different possible strategy that would
involve DSA attempting to leverage its relatively small membership to
publicize radical critiques of the system – critiques calling for
non-capitalist solutions to our society’s woes.

In Joe’s plenary address on socialist strategy and again in the
priorities resolution approved on Oct. 27, a dual approach to strategy
was essentially endorsed.  That is, it was decided that DSA should join
with various activist organizations fighting against neo-liberal
austerity, including liberal organizations and labor and community
groups lacking any kind of socialist ideology.  But at the same time, we
should work to educate our coalition partners and the public at large
about a deeper socialist analysis of the current economic slump and
long-term alternatives to it.  In this way, the final priorities
resolution that the delegates approved on Oct. 27, the last day of the
convention, partly transcended the clashing priorities of the “organize,
organize” school and the “educate, educate” school in DSA by calling on
members and DSA local chapters to do both, and to do so in coordinated
fashion.

An important amendment to the priorities document that was proposed by
DSA’s former national director Frank Llewellyn and approved on Oct. 27
calls on DSA members and chapters, at least at the local level, to
address the crisis in political democracy symbolized by ongoing efforts
to restrict minority and low-income voting participation, to free
wealthy corporations from any social controls over their campaign
contributions, as the Supreme Court largely accomplished under its
notorious Citizens United decision, and to restrict popular political
participation in other ways while privileging that of the wealthy and
the corporations.

 DSA is hardly an authoritarian organization that has any ability, or
for that matter any intent, of imposing a “party line” on individual
chapters or individual members who dissent from the choices made by the
national office, the NPC, or for that matter the decisions of the
national convention.   What was stated in the plenary sessions and voted
on by the delegates in Emeryville in late October need not be binding on
those of us in the Metro DC chapter.  But in my opinion, the vision that
Joe laid out in his socialist strategy address and that was embedded in
the priorities statement that delegates approved on the last day of the
convention offers some very promising guidelines on how DSAers and other
progressives can go about battling against right-wing austerity politics
in the months and years to come.

***Andy Feeney** is a Metro DC DSA steering committee member and was a
local delegate to the DSA national convention in Oakland, Calif. Oct.
24-27*

[*Sustainable Truths in DSA’s “Toward Freedom”
statement*](http://dsadc.org/sustainable-truths-in-dsas-toward-freedom-statement/)

Thursday, October 31st, 2013

*** The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2013**

*By Jose Gutierrez*

Even though [*“Toward
Freedom”*](http://www.dsausa.org/socialist_strategy#77) is from the
mid-1990’s, many passages from the document are relevant to the United
States of 2013 and should be studied by DSA members.

I’ll mention some of the parts that I think we should discuss in the
future

“Democratic Socialism does not rest upon one sole tradition: it draws
upon Marxism, religious and ethical socialism, feminism, theories that
critique human domination. Socialism is a choice, its vision never
permanently secured.”

“Toward Freedom” argued in favor of the continued relevance of Marxism
at a time when many thought it was not and instead celebrated “The End
of History”. 

The document also argued that even under worker self-management, there
would be a need for political pluralism. 

“Toward Freedom” argued that there would be areas of expertise and job
specialization under socialism, but these matters should be decided
democratically. The rotation of menial tasks, frequent sabbaticals, job
retraining, a shorter work week, more leisure is also proposed.

The importance of a coalition strategy is emphasized.

The document argues that Marx was overly optimistic about the
development of class consciousness. 

It also argues that in no country has there been a mobilized, conscious
majority for socialism and asks why.

The reasons for this lack of support are the association of socialism
with authoritarian communism, the post World War II prosperity and
welfare state and finally the possibility of a capital strike where new
investment is withheld or flees countries. Chile under Salvador Allende
and France under Francois Mitterrand are often mentioned as examples of
a capital strike.

It is interesting to note that two of these factors are but a memory.
The Soviet Union ceased to exist over twenty years ago, and the wage of
the average American has stagnated since 1973. Perhaps this one of the
reasons why opinion polls show increased support for socialism in the
United States, in particular among young people.

A left coalition would need to bring together the working class, the
middle strata, and unorganized clerical workers and service sector
workers and would need to stress democratic control over consumption and
social provision.

It is truer now than then that the middle class can’t afford health
care, housing, education or child care.

Decommodification of these basic needs would be supported by progressive
taxes and a reduction of military spending.

The importance of mass mobilization and democratic legitimacy is
mentioned and that, as Rosa Luxembourg argued, after a revolution there
should be a rapid restoration of civil liberties.

It is recognized by the writers of the document that capitalist
democracy is not entirely bourgeois but not entirely democratic.

In the section of class consciousness and civil society the concept of
counter hegemony which was developed by Antonio Gramsci, the Italian
communist, is mentioned and analyzed.

There is a need for organizing the workplace, the neighborhood, the
church, the synagogue, the mosque, the PTA. 

There is a need for organizing in civil society, for cultural,
educational, ideological work.

The writers propose a socialist globalization to replace neoliberal
globalization.

The transition to socialism is likely to happen not at once but during a
whole historical period, an era where there is a gradual displacement of
capitalism and through worker buy outs, democratic control over pension
funds and mandated worker and consumer representation on corporate
boards.

As I wrote at the beginning much of it is relevant and thought provoking
but it is up to us in the year 2013 to determine how the document can
inform our actions and worldview.

[*Thoughts About Building the Next Left: DSA’s National Strategy
Document from
1998*](http://dsadc.org/thoughts-about-building-the-next-left-dsas-national-strategy-document-from-1998/)

Thursday, October 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2013**

 

*By Andy Feeney*

 

 Over the next few years, DSA’s national office and the members of our
National Political Committee (NPC) would like members of the
organization to study, debate and amend our organizational strategy,
which was last significantly altered in 1998.

 The need for such a rethinking of DSA strategy seem obvious, although
the task of bringing our strategic and organizational ideas up to date
with current realities is obviously a challenging one.

 This article deals mainly with two documents considered for updating:
[*“Building the Next Left:  The Political Perspective of the Democratic
Socialists of
America,”*](http://http:/www.dsausa.org/socialist_strategy#144) and
[*“Toward Freedom:  Democratic Socialist Theory and
Practice.”*](http://http:/www.dsausa.org/socialist_strategy#77)

** A Few Minor Changes That Have Occurred to the World Since Bill
Clinton Held Office Back in 1998**

 

**A.       Wars and Rumors of War**

In the political economy of the United States and the world, as we all
know, the last 15 years have featured some dramatic and often upsetting
changes.  These include – just for starters — the launching  of two
major US wars, in Iraq and Afghanistan; the traumatic events of 9/11/01
and the “war on terror” that flowed from them; the further flowering of
the U.S. national security state under Bush as well as Obama, the
massive expansion of government spying on the American public and the
people of the world by the NSA, and the well-publicized rise of Al Qaeda
as the supposed face of radical Islamic jihad across much of Africa and
Asia.

**B.       Chavez and the Bolivarian Revolution in Latin America**

Since the late 1990s the world has also witnessed the establishment of a
“Bolivarian” revolution in South America championed by the late Cesar
Chavez of Venezuela and kindred leftwing radicals in Bolivia and
Ecuador. 

**C.       “Re-Orienting” the Global Economy:  China, Inc. and the Asian
Tigers**

The global capitalist marketplace meanwhile has been partly transformed
by the continued economic expansion of China and its emergence as the
second-largest economy in the world.  The ongoing industrialization of
India is promising to alter world market realities still further, as
these two prominent Asian economies – accompanied to some degree by the
smaller “Asian Tiger” economies of East and South Asia — shake off the
memory of western imperial domination and resume what some historians
believe was their status before 1750 – as the world’s leading export
economies.

**D.       The Bush Revolution on the Supreme Court, and the Election of
Obama**

Just within the borders of the United States, meanwhile, politics since
the 1990s have been radically changed by the appointment of two new
conservative justices to the U.S. Supreme Court by George W. Bush, by
the court’s subsequent overturning of legal restrictions on corporate
political advocacy coupled with its recent weakening of the 1965 Voting
Rights Act, and by the election of the nation’s first non-white
president — Barack Obama – along with a white backlash that has
followed.

 E.        **The Real Estate Speculation Bubble and the Onset of Global
Economic Crisis**

Over this same fairly brief span of time, both the U.S. and other
western capitalist societies have been wracked by the puncturing of a
huge global real estate investment bubble and collapse or near-collapse
of major financial institutions – a shocking and potentially
catastrophic economic event in 2007 and 2008 that then gave rise to a
massive growth in government indebtedness, both in the US and in many
leading market economies of Europe. 

**F.        Government Debts and Financial Crisis in the Eurozone**

As they have scrambled to take on corporate debt to prevent the further
destabilizing of national economies, therefore, western  governments in
such places as Greece, Ireland, Iceland, and Spain have essentially
collapsed or been replaced by the European authorities as the price of
having their loan payment deadlines delayed by the bankers. 

Many European nations and the U.S., to a lesser extent, have fallen into
economic recession as this process has taken place.

**G.     The LGBT Revolution and Its Discontents, and the Immigration
Question.**

Meanwhile the US and several other western countries have experienced a
cultural and legal revolution as the gay rights movement has
increasingly won victories in the legal arena, even to the extent of
advancing gay marriage in some states of the Union.   The victories of
the gay rights movement arguably have helped to feed the emergence of a
homophobic and politically conservative religious right, although some
observers think this anti-gay backlash is now diminishing a bit.

The US and most of the capitalist societies of Europe have meanwhile
experienced a huge increase in immigration, both legal and undocumented,
as well as the emergence of angry nativist movements aimed at combatting
further immigration.  The building of a huge anti-immigration wall along
the Texas/ Mexican border and the recent acceleration of deportations of
undocumented workers under the auspices of the Obama White House are
partial testaments to the vehemence of that backlash.

Feeding both undocumented and document legal immigration to the US,
meanwhile, has been an awkward side effect of NAFTA and other “free
trade” treaties  adopted with bipartisan support in the 1990s.   As poor
peasants in Mexico and Central America, in particular, have been
displaced through the invasion of their national economies by large
transnational corporations given new access to Latin markets by NAFTA
and the World Trade Organization (WTO), millions have been forced
northward to look for work in the agricultural fields, meatpacking
plants and many other industrial enterprises of the United States,
putting the immigration controversy on the front pages.

**H.      Electronic Media and the Arab Spring Revolutions**

The spread of “social” electronic media – Facebook, Twitter and the
World Wide Web, plus the seemingly relentless ownership of cell phones –
has significantly transformed common forms of human communication over
this same period.  Arguably the latest developments in electronic media,
especially Twitter and Facebook, helped to foster the Arab Spring
revolutions of a few years ago and the overthrow of repressive and
dictatorial governments in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya, among other places.

**I.         The Politics and Economics of Climate Catastrophe**

Finally, as all of these social and political transformations, and
others besides, have been changing the face of the United States and the
world, the continued inability or unwillingness of most governments and
large corporations to curb industrial emissions of CO2 and other
“greenhouse” gases has pushed the planet further along the road to
catastrophic climate change.   

 The latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), released last month, makes this clear.  Many environmentalists
and climate activists would point to last summer’s catastrophic floods
in Colorado and equally disastrous wildfires in California as evidence
that the IPCC’s conclusions are correct, and that they bode ill for
human beings in many climate-sensitive parts of the world.

 

**So What Needs to Change in DSA’s Strategic Vision?**

Under these radically changing circumstances, how adequate is DSA’s
basic strategy document that members debated and finally endorsed in the
late 1990s?

After briefly reviewing two 1998 strategy documents,  “Building the Next
Left:  The Political Perspective of the Democratic Socialists of
America,” and “Toward Freedom:  Democratic Socialist Theory and
Practice,” as part of a project by members of the Metro DC Dsa Steering
Committee, I would argue that many key passages in these document are
surprisingly contemporary in tone.  However, many the more catastrophic
events of the past 15 years have discouraged many DSA chapters from
following them. 

I think other findings of these documents either are less accurate than
DSA members thought in the late 1990s, or that most DSA members have
simply forgotten about them because they seemed too difficult to put
into practice, leaving our organization in the embarrassing pickle of
failing to practice what we preach. 

I would also suggest that DSA’s relatively loose administrative
structure and the freedom of individuals and chapters to depart at will
from the national organization’s stated principles have made the more
impressive and most controversial  aspects of “Building the Next Left,”
especially, much less important in practice than they undoubtedly seemed
to many DSA activists at the time.

 **Even European Social Democracy Was “Obsolete,” DSA Activists Argued
in 1998: Do Most DSA Members Today Still Agree?**

One bold statement in “Building the Next Left” that some DSA members
strongly agree with, for example, is that thanks in part to “the
unbridled power of transnational corporations … Traditional left
prescriptions \[for political and economic change\] have failed on both
sides of the Communist / socialist divide.”

 Or as the authors of “Building the Next Left” put it, “Global economic
integration has rendered obsolete both the social democratic solution of
independent national economies sustaining a strong social welfare state
and the Communist solution of state-owned national economies fostering
social development.”

 Within the Metro DC chapter and around DSA, however, it is clear that
many members still have considerable hope in the “social democratic
solution of independent national economies sustaining a strong social
welfare state.”  We may have to admit that this solution seems to be
failing miserably in Spain, for example, even when Spain is formally led
by democratic socialist politicians, but many of us are not willing to
concede that this “social democratic” answer has failed in – say,
Germany or Scandinavia.

How do democratic socialists feel – and how should we feel – about using
Scandinavian social democracy as our model for progressive politics in
the U.S.?  This is an issue that current DSA members need to debate and
rethink, I would argue.

 **How Much Did DSA in the 1990s Still Believe in the Democrats? How Do
Most DSAers Feel About This Today?**

 A second major theme of the 1998 strategy documents that leaps out – to
me, anyway – is the decreased faith that the authors of “Building the
Next Left” felt about working for change within the theoretical limits
of New Deal liberalism or the political confines of the Democratic
Party.

 “Today,” the 1998 document states, “the mildly redistributive welfare
state liberalism of the 1960s, which accepted the corporate dominance of
economic decision-making, can no longer be the programmatic basis for a
majoritarian progressive politics.

 “New Deal and Great Society liberalism depended upon redistribution at
the margins of an ever-expanding economic pie.  But today corporations
no longer aspire to expand production and consumption by raising global
living standard; rather, global capital engages in a race to increase
profits by “downsizing’ and lowering wages.”

Rather than calling for the reassembling of a Democratic majority
politics characterized by “strong trade unions, social movements and
urban, Democratic political machines,” the 1998 document argues, “a next
left must be built from the bottom up.”

Has DSA since 1998 found any strategic success in rebuilding the left
“from the bottom up,” I wonder? 

How many newer members have joined DSA over the last two years mostly
because they are still committed to the New Deal liberalism of the 1930s
and the “mildly redistributive” politics of the 1960s Great Society
(along with the expansion of civil rights for African Americans, women
and gay people that has occurred since the 1960s), and hope that
somehow, DSA can basically goad the Obama administration and the
national Democratic Party to pursue a basically liberal and basically
traditional agenda?

 How many older DSA members still harbor hopes for the Democrats, if
only out of horror at the damage that the victorious Republicans
accomplished following George Bush’s dubious victory over Al Gore in
2001, and the onset of Republican war-mongering,  Republican tax cuts
for the wealthy and Republican attempts to privatize Social Security
after 2001?

How many current DSA members still agree with the authors of the 1998
“Rebuilding the Left” document that democratic socialists can work
either for third parties or for reform within the Democratic Party?  For
that matter, how many current DSA members, especially younger ones
influenced by the Occupy movement, have given up hoping for reform
through electoral politics at all?

 **A Road Not Taken:  Global Solidarity to Combat the Might of Global
Corporations**

 A striking theme of the 1998 strategy document is that thanks to the
growth of transnational corporations, purely national approaches to
social and economic progress are obsolete, that “today’s social
movements must be as global as the corporate power they confront; they
must cooperate across national boundaries and promote democratic
regulation of transnational capital.”

Historically, the U.S. left seemed to be taking a major step in that
direction with the 1999 “Battle of Seattle” protests and civil
disobedience against the G-20 summit.  Huge demonstrations here in
Washington DC against the annual meeting of the IMF soon followed.

But in the wake of the World Trade Center bombings of Sept. 11, 2001 and
the “war on terror” that followed, the international movement against
corporate globalism seems to have faltered; at least, participation in
it has become riskier for anti-corporate demonstrators, and the tactics
employed by the Black Bloc anarchists at some of the latest
anti-globalization protests have been controversial with liberals and
probably with some democratic socialists.

How do most DSA activists feel today about international anti-global
solidarity?  Equally to the point, how much has DSA, either nationally
or at the level of individual chapters, actually engaged in global
solidarity work?  If we chose to start acting on this principle from the
1998 strategy document, how should we do so?

 **Is a Global “Leveling” Up of Living Standards — And Also Resource Use
— Still Feasible?**

DSA in 1998 , in condemning the overseas outsourcing strategies of major
corporations and the decreased U.S. living standards that resulted from
them, called for socialists to fight for a “leveling up” of wages and
living standards around the world.  Fighting for rising standards for
all was seen as the left’s only moral alternative to the global
“leveling down” that the corporations were pursuing at the expense of
American workers.

The political and moral logic of “leveling up” seems intuitively
impeccable at first glance.  But in a world of limited natural resources
where the richest capitalist societies contribute disproportionately to
problems like global climate change, most environmentalists agree that
it would be catastrophic if all of the world’s peoples somehow, through
whatever miracle, achieved the same levels of resource use and engaged
in same kinds of consumerism that now characterize American society as a
whole.

 Obviously income distribution within any given capitalist society is
important, and there are extremely poor people here in the US who still
need to see their living standards and their wages improve.  There are
even more desperately poor people in many formerly colonized societies
who need sharply increased living standards to achieve even minimal
levels of human decency, and socialists need to fight for this. 

 But on a finite, if resource-rich, planet with finite reserves of
non-renewable fossil fuels and metallic ores, and with finitely bounded
natural systems that are essential to human civilization (examples
include ocean fisheries, tropical and temperate forests, and productive
soils that supply humanity with food), most environmental analysts argue
that it is simply impossible for all 7 billion people on Earth to enjoy
the same levels of resource use that the average American now enjoys.  

 If everyone on Earth could be “leveled up” to current U.S. levels of
consumerism, the scientists warn, a single Planet Earth would be
insufficient to support all of us; indeed, we would need to exploit two
or three Earth-like planets to sustain the global population at current
U.S. levels.

 How should democratic socialists, both in the Metro DC area and
nationwide, grapple with this dilemma imposed by the physical
constraints of resource availability, while still supporting socialist
and egalitarian values?

 **On “Economic Democracy” and the Solidarity Economy**

 For many of us familiar with the writings of the old Left, with the
economic ideas of Marx, Lenin and even many of the European democratic
socialists, a striking feature of the 1998 “Rebuilding the Left”
document is its focus on “economic democracy” – on the idea of building
the next left partly by supporting the idea of a mixed market and
government economy coupled with the development of a strong sector of
worker-owned businesses and cooperatives that could conceivably struggle
to compete in such an economy and – over time – provide an alternative
to large-scale corporate businesses that employ alienated labor.

 A Metro DC “Socialist Salon” on David Schweickart’s notions of how such
a system of “Economic Democracy” might be built provoked some sharp
arguments within our chapter early in 2013, and it seems clear that some
DSA members feel it would be a betrayal of “real socialism,” although
other members support it.

 How far should DSA go in promoting “Economic Democracy” in the future,
and how should it be integrated – if it is integrated at all – into our
other work for incremental economic reform on behalf of the unemployed,
low-wage retail workers, labor organizing rights, and government
spending on the poor and dispossessed under capitalism?

 Also, what sense should DSA make – if any – of Chavez’s Bolivarian
revolution, or the street fighting that has occurred in Spain and Greece
against austerity policies dictated by stronger European economies and
the financial industry?

 How should democratic socialists incorporate into our thinking the
perils and the political possibilities raised by the near collapse of
the capitalist global banking system in 2007 and 2008, accompanied by
what left economist David McNally says was a \$20 trillion loss in paper
economic value?

These are some of many questions that I argue for all DSAers, or at any
rate, for the most committed among us, to be keeping in mind as we
review DSA’s old strategy documents and engage in the long process of
revising them.  I hope that the *Washington Socialist*’s coverage of the
strategy reassessment project will help people in the chapter to begin
on that difficult but important task.

[*Virginia Progressives: “You Need A
Raise!”*](http://dsadc.org/virginia-progressives-you-need-a-raise/)

Thursday, October 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2013**

*By Daniel Adkins*

 The Democratic Party Committees of Fairfax and Arlington County
recently organized two meetings that two or three hundred peoplehave
attended.

 The first, held by the Arlington County Democratic Committee, was on
the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), which meets secretly
in areas of controlled access. Its goal seems to be limiting government
while privatizing local and state governments to maximize business
profits. Other well-known ALEC efforts include “stand your ground” laws
like Florida’s and voter suppression through voter ID and other laws at
the state level. The information on ALEC was similar to many strategies
Northern Virginia senators and delegates have run into in Richmond.

 The second meeting was organized by the Fairfax County Democratic
Committee. The meeting was called **“You Need A Raise!”** and dealt with
the growing income inequality in the US and the policies that foster it.
The panel was impressive and listed below:

 Hedrick Smith, Author of *Who Stole the American Dream*

Thea Lee, Deputy Chief of Staff, AFL-CIO President’s Office

Dean Baker, Co-Director, Center for Economic and Policy Research

Lori Wallach, Director, Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch

Lawrence Mishel, President, Economic Policy Institute

Moderator: Solon Simmons, Interim Dean, GMU School for Conflict Analysis
& Resolution

 Sandra Klassen, National Affairs committee chair, for the Fairfax
County Democratic Committee, chaired the meeting.

 Cosponsors included the Virginia AFL-CIO, Economic Policy Institute
Policy Center, Northern Virginia Labor Federation, Virginia Progressive
Caucus, NAAPC, Unitarians, and many others.

 The discussion was not different from Bill Moyers’ or Robert Reich’s
points on inequality. One difference was a push for a financial
transaction tax, which is supported by DSA. Another significant point
was the need to stop any more “free trade” agreements which have moved
many viable jobs overseas. These trade agreements do nothing to expand
labor or environmental rights or stem abuses.

  In the inequality meeting there was only one person who voiced
skepticism about the topic.

 Virginia politics can look bleak when you see Tea Party candidates for
state government, but the state is purple and with efforts like this,
change is looking like a better prospect.
