***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from September 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*WELCOME to the Labor Day issue of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-labor-day-issue-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Friday, September 11th, 2015

 

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the Labor Day 2015 issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
monthly email newsletter of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America**.

The traditional end of summer finds us facing a really busy year, with a
busier one following. Socialists are engaged in national politics in a
way that we haven’t been for decades, supporting a self-identified
democratic socialist who is stunning the political world with his
traction in the Democratic presidential primaries. Sen. Bernie Sanders
is galvanizing huge crowds and slowly rinsing the socialist concept
clean of the stains imposed on it by a sequence of demonizations of the
Left: the Red Scare, the Cold War, McCarthyism.

That excitement is certainly crowding our calendar even more than Labor
Day usually signals. ***A new DSA local in Baltimore*** introduces
itself Sept. 20 at Red Emma’s coffeehouse. See the article below.
***National DSA holds its convention*** rather close by, in Bolivar,
Pa., Nov. 13-15. Before you make travel plans, though, put yourself
forward as a delegate for Metro DC DSA. We are allotted 10 delegates and
we will choose them at ***our September membership meeting Sept. 13***,
2 p.m. at the MLK main library, 901 G St NW, Washington, DC 20001. You
don’t have to make the meeting to propose yourself as a delegate; see
more info on our [*Meetup
page*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=bb9811fc03&e=003de9ccab).
There will also be time set aside at the membership meeting for canvass
training for We Need Bernie, DSA’s independent-expenditure arm for
supporting the Sanders campaign. [*See photos of our recent
activity*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=1f35b62d26&e=003de9ccab)

Also on the Meetup page you’ll find details on our other upcoming
events: The Socialist Salon Thursday, Sept. 17; \[EDIT Sept. 10 — this
may be changed; see the Meetup page\] the DCDSA Happy Hour at Luna
Grille Sept. 30 and book discussion group Oct. 4.

***IN THIS ISSUE***

**IMMEDIATE/UPCOMING** &lt;&gt; Jonathan Phipps, principal organizer for
the new Baltimore DSA local (and also a much-traveled member of the
Metro DC Steering Committee) provides details about the Sept. 20 kickoff
event at Red Emma’s, including transportation options from DC and the
suburbs. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=513c1df6cb&e=003de9ccab)**.**
David Duhalde, DSA deputy director and manager of the new DC office, has
more about the national DSA convention Nov. 13-15 in Bolivar, Pa.
[***Read complete
article.***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c673694e73&e=003de9ccab)

**LABOR** &lt;&gt; Kurt Stand assesses the state of things on Labor Day
2015, with the energy born of the sadness in Charleston, S.C. and the
new perspectives on inequality and resistance that have come in this
tumultuous year. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=11d9000278&e=003de9ccab).
Carolyn Byerly analyzes the particular dangers that arise when women
journalists report on injustice and criminality and how our
often-immature information culture fails to support them. [***Read
complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=90463677a2&e=003de9ccab)
Andy Feeney updates the fight against the Trans Pacific Partnership,
which has moved to a new level with Obama’s pyrrhic victory on
fast-track authorization – and remains hopeful due to internal
nationalist schisms in global capital. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=72c7c46cfa&e=003de9ccab)

**THE PLANET** &lt;&gt;  Woody Woodruff and Andy Feeney expand on a
report by Friends of the Earth’s Ben Schrieber to the DSA member meeting
in August about the woefully inadequate gestures made by various nations
in advance of December’s crucial Paris summit on climate change – and on
what could be done instead. [***Read complete
article**.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=e0d1362458&e=003de9ccab)
Feeney, in a separate account, examines the effects of global trade on
the integrity of natural systems as invasive species such as the tiny
Emerald Ash Borer stand to cost Maryland and other states multiple
millions of dollars just to ameliorate. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8c8a9915ba&e=003de9ccab).
Woodruff reports on an EPI talk by James Galbraith in July; the
economist was a consultant to Syriza as the radical Greek government
struggled to free itself from the debt bomb imposed on it by European
governments who sacrificed Greece and its workers to save their own
banks. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=0b947d12fd&e=003de9ccab)

**OUR TURF** &lt;&gt; Bill Mosley reports on the Statehood Ambassadors,
a new strategy to help tourists to the national capital understand the
disenfranchisement of the residents. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7004730c65&e=003de9ccab)
Mosley also recounts a movement to persuade the ownership of the local
professional football franchise that another name for the team would be
much, much better. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7c92a0f234&e=003de9ccab)
Kurt Stand reports on the formation of a Prince George’s County chapter
of the activist group Progressive Maryland and the issues they will
tackle, including a paid sick leave bill in the county that is coming up
for consideration as early as this week. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=462c629453&e=003de9ccab)

**BOOKS/ARTS/CULTURE** &lt;&gt; Mosley reviews *Jacksonland*, a tale of
the clearing of native peoples out of the East under the profit-seeking
fist of the fellow on the twenty-dollar bill.[ ***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=2dc927a923&e=003de9ccab).
Lynn Williamson, a member of the local’s book discussion group, analyzes
a current selection, Steve Fraser’s *Age of Acquiescence* – an account
of the First and (current) Second Gilded Ages. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=16f7580824&e=003de9ccab)
Mosley also walks us through a current National Portrait Gallery exhibit
on Dolores Huerta, a DSA honorary co-chair and Cesar Chavez’ second in
command in the formation of the United Farm Workers. [***Read complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f287a4afe3&e=003de9ccab)
Finally, our regular feature “Good Reads for Socialists” provides links
for some provocative articles you may have missed. This month, more
about the Sanders campaign, of course, plus criminal justice reform,
housing and gentrification, and John Oliver on DC Statehood. [***Read
complete
article***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=13ed2cdc7d&e=003de9ccab)

**You can read these and other past articles in the *Washington
Socialist* on our website where they are archived,**
[***dsadc.org***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=808211a7d0&e=003de9ccab)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*ANNALS OF CAPITALISM- How Global Trade May Destroy the Ash Trees of
Maryland*](http://dsadc.org/annals-of-capitalism-how-global-trade-may-destroy-the-ash-trees-of-maryland-2/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

Last summer, one of the less-noticed side effects of global capitalist
trade made unwelcome headlines in Maryland.  In late June the Star
Democrat newspaper (based in Easton) reported that for the first time, a
small and rather beautiful species of invasive insect, the emerald ash
borer (EAB), had been discovered on the Eastern Shore, in Dorchester and
Queen Anne’s counties.

The ash borer, a native of Asia thought to have first arrived in the
U.S. in wooden packaging materials in 2003, is smaller than a penny as
an adult, with dark shiny green wings flecked with gold specks.  By
boring into the bark of ash trees and laying its eggs there, it can
weaken and eventually kill affected trees.  Currently the ash borer is
found in 25 states, including Maryland and Virginia.  According to U.S.
Department of Agriculture projections, the EAB’s effect on ash trees, if
its spread across the country goes unchecked, could ultimately cause
some \$20 billion to \$60 billion in damage to the national economy.

In the metropolitan Baltimore area alone, experts predict that the
damage the insect does to ash trees could cost local residents as much
as \$223 million in time.  In the City of Baltimore proper, where
approximately 200,000 ash trees make up about 8-10% of the tree cover,
the city forester estimates that ash borer control will ultimately will
cost taxpayers around \$1 million.

Along with individual homeowners with ash trees on their property, city
officials hoping to eradicate the EAB or limit its effects currently
face a choice of repeatedly treating trees with a chemical poison called
emanectin benzoate,” at a cost of \$100 to \$400 per tree, or
alternatively having smaller ash trees cut down at a cost of several
hundred dollars each.  Whichever path is chosen, the city forester
expects Baltimore, after spending a significant sum on EAB control, will
still lose a significant fraction of its ash trees.

Unfortunately, the emerald ash borer is far from the only exotic
invasive species now causing significant economic damage in the wider
metropolitan DC area.

Recent news stories indicate that the invasive northern snakehead fish,
a voracious predator that can decimate other species of fish and
devastate local populations of crustaceans and amphibians, has now
become firmly established along 60 miles of the Potomac River.  The
highly destructive zebra mussel, a species native to the Caspian Sea,
has been present in northern Maryland since 2008 and recently has been
found in the northern Chesapeake Bay.  Zebra mussels, which first came
to the U.S. in 1986 in the ballast water of visiting cargo ships, have
since caused environmental and economic havoc in parts of the Great
Lakes by filtering so many nutrients out of lake water that some
commercially desirable fish species can’t find enough to eat.

In the Great Lakes region, the mussels also are notorious for attaching
themselves in huge numbers to the water intake pipes of municipal
waterworks and nuclear power plants, drastically reducing their intake
capacity and forcing city governments and private corporations to spend
hundreds of millions of dollars removing them.  What costs the zebra
mussel could ultimately inflict on Maryland are still unknown.

In addition, the Maryland Department of Natural Resources and the
Maryland Invasive Species Council list a host of other harmful invasive
species and potential invasive species that threaten economic and other
losses to the state. Noted examples include the kudzu vine, the gypsy
moth, the invasive water weed hydrilla, the green crab, the maritime
garden snail and the Japanese beetle.  According to the Maryland
Department of Agriculture, some 42,000 acres of hemlock forests in the
northwest corner of the state are threatened by yet another invader, the
tiny hemlock woolly adelgid or HWA, a native of Asia that first came to
North America in the 1920s and to Maryland in the 1980s.

Another invasive species with its origins in the United States west of
the Appalachians, the rusty crayfish, was probably first brought to
Maryland as fish bait.  It has been present in the Susquehanna River
basin in northern Maryland since 2007: according to the Department of
Agriculture, and is “infamous for overrunning freshwater streams and
lakes,” where it can have “devastating effect on native crayfishes,
aquatic vegetation, fishes, and other stream species.”

The European pine shoot beetle, a brown or black insect with a
cylindrical body that is about as big as a match head as an adult,  can
cause “serious decline of entire stands of trees” by eating young pine
shoots and laying its eggs in them, according to Maryland authorities.
It was first introduced into the U.S. in 1992 and now exists in 17
states, including Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia and Pennsylvania.

What almost all of these destructive organisms have in common, although
the commercial media rarely mention it, is that their expansion into new
and unfamiliar environments where they escape control by natural
predators has been heavily dependent on the progress of capitalist
trade, capitalist investment, and capitalist transportation
technologies.

Capitalist society, as professional biologists recognize, did not itself
invent the problem of invasive species.  The process of plant and animal
species evolving in particular geographical areas and then migrating
into different ones, where a few of them explode in numbers and disrupt
the environment, probably has been going on for millennia.  It may have
begun shortly after the super-continent of Pangaea began breaking up
into separate continents and islands some 240 million years ago, thus
fostering the evolution of new plant and animal species in ecosystems
newly isolated from each other.  Through subsequent migrations of seeds,
spores and adult organisms facilitated by wind, water and other
mechanisms, some species may have been gradually working to reconnect
the world’s disconnected land masses ever since.

With the evolution of more or less modern humans over the last 400,000
years or so, and the migration of our distant ancestors out of Africa to
the far corners of the planet over many thousands of years, the
migration of disruptive non-human species into new areas probably
accelerated.  Environmentalist Chris Bright, in his 1998 book *Life Out
of Bounds: Bioinvasion in a Borderless World*, notes that “Nearly
everywhere, invasion \[of unfamiliar environments by exotic organisms\]
has been, in varying degrees … a standard feature of the human past.” 
But the development of modern capitalism since the late Middle Ages and
the Renaissance has super-charged the process, Bright indicates, making
the process of species transfer and ecological disruption much faster
than before, and far more common.

As Bright puts it, “Biotic mixing on a global level began in earnest
general five centuries ago, as the Age of Discovery dawned.  It is
reaching its logical extreme today, in the emergence of a global
economy.  At its current level … bioinvasion has become another way of
measuring the unsustainability of the contemporary economic order.”

Five centuries ago is roughly when Columbus “discovered” the Americas
and initiated the European (initially, just the Spanish) colonization of
the New World.  It is also roughly when the Portuguese navigator Vasco
da Gama found a sea route from Western Europe southward around the tip
of Africa into the Indian Ocean, and from there northward to the Indian
port of Surat, in a voyage that became the foundation for Portugal’s
establishment of a commercial empire in Africa and Asia.

In the view of many economic historians, including Adam Smith in his
classic work *The Wealth of Nations*, the evolution of modern capitalism
out of the vigorous commercial society of the European Renaissance took
a big leap forward due to the discoveries of Columbus and da Gama and
other European explorers.  Smith wrote that the two explorers, by
forging new trading links among Europe, Asia and the Americas, together
laid the foundations for a truly global economy that, by fostering a
more advanced division of labor and creating new export markets for
surplus goods of both West and East, would vastly improve average labor
productivity on a global scale, thus making possible eventual prosperity
for all.

More critical observers have noted that the Age of Discovery was soon
followed by the establishment of large European empires, the flourishing
of the brutal Atlantic slave trade and the creation of new
plantation-based economies in the New World that relied extensively on
imported slave labor and that of white indentured servants.  For
generations, socialists and other progressives have been lamenting the
horrifying human costs of these developments.

Yet as Bright’s *Life Out of Bounds* indicates, and as environmental
historian Alfred Crosby also wrote in *Ecological Imperi*alism, the rise
and fall of large European empires and the continuing evolution of a
world market since the Age of Discovery have had striking ecological
impacts, not just human ones.

In colonizing the Americas, the Spanish conquistadores and later
European intruders also introduced into new American environments such
species as European rabbits, rats, cats, dogs, goats, sheep, cattle,
horses, pigs, honeybees and clover, among other disruptive invasive
organisms ranging from dandelions and stinging nettles to Old World
peach trees, wild oats, and mustard.  Upon arriving in the Americas,
these and other newcomers quickly displaced many established plant and
animal species.

European colonists, both by bringing their own Old World diseases to the
New World and by importing slaves to the Americas from malaria-infested
areas of Africa, also accidentally insured that Old World diseases fatal
to humans would arrive.

Without denying or excusing the violence, greed and cruelty of the early
conquistadores, Crosby and Bright argue that it was mostly Old World
diseases that triggered a catastrophic decline in the indigenous
populations of North and South America in the first century following
the Spanish conquests.  In this brief period, Bright states, “as many as
two thirds of the western hemisphere’s native inhabitants – perhaps 30
million people – may have succumbed to smallpox, malaria and other Old
World diseases.”

The smallpox virus had long been present in the Old World, Crosby notes
in Ecological Imperialism, but for some reason smallpox epidemics only
reached crisis proportions in Europe over approximately three centuries
from the 1500s through the mid-1700s. However, while the disease was a
great killer of children, European adults living in ports where they
experienced repeated exposures were relatively resistant to it.  As
colonial expansion occurred, however, European sailors inadvertently
carried the disease to people in the Americas who were not resistant. 
The result was demographic disaster.

From its 1519 arrival in the Caribbean through the start of the
twentieth century, Crosby writes, smallpox “played as essential a role
in the advance of white imperialism overseas as gunpowder.” 
Accidentally introduced into Mexico in the early 1500s, ahead of the
conquest of Tenochitlan by Cortes, “the disease exterminated a large
fraction of the Aztecs and cleared a path for … the founding of New
Spain.”  In Peru, similarly, the virus caused severe population losses
and spread chaos and civil war in the Incan Empire before the arrival of
Francisco Pizarro, so that his apparently miraculous victories over the
Incas were “in large part” the triumphs of smallpox.

Crosby argues further that smallpox infections also spread very rapidly
to other densely occupied parts of the Amerindian New World, possibly
ranging “from the Great Lakes to the pampa \[in Argentina\]” by 1530. 
He hypothesizes that it was smallpox, again, that devastated the complex
civilization of the Mound Builders in the present-day U.S. by 1540.

At the same time European explorers and conquerors were both
deliberately and accidentally introducing Old World organisms into the
New World, there was a large flow of organisms native to the New World
in the opposite direction.  Such plants as “Indian corn” or maize,
tobacco, potatoes, tomatoes, bell peppers, chocolate, and eventually
Brazilian rubber and quinine are among the prime examples.

Basically capitalist trade under colonial auspices also resulted in
Europeans establishing sugar cane, coffee and tobacco plantations in the
Caribbean and Latin America, while importing significant volumes of
silver, gold, seal furs, beaver furs, whale oil, timber and codfish from
the Americas.  Colonial trade over the next few centuries also dealt in
ivory, slaves, ostrich feathers, dye woods and other products from
Africa; in jute, indigo, spices and cotton calicoes from India; in
cloves and other spices from what is now Indonesia, and in tea, silk and
porcelain from China.

Far more so than any other period of similar length in history,
therefore, the past 500 years since Columbus’s voyage have featured an
enormous global remixing of plant and animal species previously
separated by geological forces and geographic isolation.

For the first several centuries following the Age of Discovery, this
remixing was carried out largely by what was then the world’s most
advanced long-distance transportation technologies, ocean-going wooden
sailing vessels whose design, average speeds and cargo capacities
steadily improved over time thanks to the ingenuity of European ship
builders.  Such ships, whose wooden hulls were vulnerable to burrowing
insects and marine organisms, and which carried loads of rocks, dirt and
other heavy materials as ballast, were themselves efficient carriers of
weed seeds, microbes, and rats and mice into new environments.  However,
they were relatively slow by modern standards and hence formed a barrier
to the global transmission of fast-developing diseases and other
organisms incapable of surviving extended ocean voyages.

Since the development of the steam ship and the railway locomotive
during the English Industrial Revolution, however, capitalist
transportation technologies have radically improved in terms of speed
and cargo-carrying capacity.  Today, seeds of invasive weeds and adults
and egg cases of invasive insects can travel hundreds of miles almost
overnight by hitchhiking rides on passing automobiles, long-distance
trucks and railroad cars.  Human disease organisms like the Ebola virus,
the cholera bacteria and the SARS virus can travel thousands of miles by
jet airliner, in many cases before their victims begin to display
symptoms.

Modern cargo ships and oil tankers made of metal no longer transmit
barnacles, insects, weed seeds and other hitchhiker organisms in their
hulls as readily as wooden vessels once did, Bright notes.  But at the
same time, the cargo holds of modern commercial and naval vessels are
much larger than those of the old wooden sailing ships, which means they
have more room for hitchhiker species, particular those hidden away
inside sealed freight containers.

Bright comments: “Containers are nearly ubiquitous; they move by ship,
rail, and road.  They can be stacked for weeks or even months in ports
or railyards, allowing plenty of time for pests to enter.  They offer a
safe haven to anything that manages to get inside, since they are very
difficult to inspect.  They are rarely cleaned between shipments, and
they may not be unpacked until they are hundreds of miles from their
ports of entry.”

Accordingly, Bright reports that shipping containers have been
identified as “significant pathways for insects, weed seeds, slugs, and
snails.”  Their deadliest and most notorious hitchhiker species to date,
though, may be the Asian tiger mosquito, a major carrier of Dengue fever
and at least 17 other vector-borne diseases, including different kinds
of encephalitis and yellow fever.  Before the mid-1980s the mosquito was
already common throughout much of the Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean
region stretching from Madagascar to Hawaii, but in the 1980s it then
went on what Bright calls a voyage of “world conquest” by riding to new
environments in shipping containers holding used rubber tires. By the
time Bright’s book appeared in 1998, it had established itself in such
new environments as southern Europe, South Africa, Nigeria, New Zealand
and Australia, Brazil, and the southeastern U.S.

Unlike wooden sailing ships that used rocks, dirt and other materials
for ballast, modern tankers have huge ballast tanks that take in
seawater when more weight is needed for stability, such as when a ship
is unloading.  The ballast tanks then release this water when the ships
need to shed weight, such as when they are loading fuel or cargo. 
Accordingly, ballast tanks have now become major transmitters of
hitchhiker organisms.

As Bright reports, “the ballast capacity of a big tanker can exceed
200,000 cubic meters – enough to fill 2,000 Olympic-sized swimming
pools.”  Accordingly, modern commercial tankers can move enormous
volumes of invasive organisms into unfamiliar environments through the
uptake and discharge of ballast water.  The world’s merchant marine
fleet, which by the late 1990s was covering some 20,500 “ton miles”
annually in terms of freight voyages, thus has created a series of
“meta-currents” in the oceans rivalling the natural ones, Bright
argues.  On any day taken at random, Bright believes these meta-currents
carry “perhaps” 3,000 different species of hitchhiker organisms, ranging
from pathogenic microbes and green plants to carnivores and scavengers.

The zebra mussel is one of the most notorious invasive species
transported via ballast water.  Others, Bright reports, include a North
American bristle worm now well established on the Baltic Sea coast of
Poland; a North American jellyfish called Leidy’s comb jelly, which has
“devastated” the fisheries of the Black Sea; a starfish from the coasts
of the Northwestern U.S. that has threatened local shellfish industries
off the coasts of Tasmania; and poisonous dinoflagellate or “red tide”
plankton from Japan that now sometimes shut down oyster production in
parts of Australia.

In addition to the spread of harmful invasive species being accelerated
by the modern shipping industry, the passenger airline business and the
global tourism industry, Bright reports, the problem of “bioinvasion”
also is promoted by commercial timber plantations, both in the temperate
zone and the tropics; by global commerce in exotic pets and
horticultural products; and by commercial shrimp farming in many
locales.

It also is encouraged by modern industrial-style agriculture, which in
many ways is inherently dependent on exotic and artificially “invasive”
species such as Old World varieties of wheat, hybrid and genetically
engineered varieties of New World maize, and a rather limited selection
of rice, oats and other grains.  The fact that most commercial crop
species are grown in monocultures, in huge fields of genetically
identical organisms, makes them unusually vulnerable to predation by
insects and competition from various weeds.

The industrial use of DDT and other chemical pesticides over the past
two generations to kill pest species in agriculture has resulted in many
of them evolving natural abilities to resist the pesticide, Bright
indicates.  For this and other reasons, the total number of pest species
affecting global agriculture is growing, not shrinking.  Writing in
1998, Bright noted that “Some 70,000 pest species are already attacking
crops, but new ones are entering the system all the time and it is never
certain where they will end up.”  This makes industrial scale
agriculture, too, a major force promoting bioinvasions.

“As ecological entities,” Bright concludes, “the continents are coming
together again; the seas are spilling into one another … Modern commerce
is wrapping the world’s natural systems in a web of connections that is
far more comprehensive than anything that could have existed on the
ancient super-continent.  A kind of hyper-Pangaea is emerging.”  This
“effective collapse of the world’s ecological barriers is a phenomenon,”
he adds, that is “so far as we know, without precedent in the entire
history of life.”

What this global phenomenon means for the future of Maryland communities
already affected by the emerald ash borer, the zebra mussel and other
invasive species is not clear.  The local economic damage that invasive
species causes to Marylanders so far seem serious, but hardly
overwhelming. But Bright concludes that on a worldwide scale, and at its
current accelerated pace, the process of bioinvasion “is no more
sustainable than are current levels of deforestation or atmospheric
carbon emissions,” primarily because of the damage bioinvasions do to
biological diversity.  To use a badly mangled metaphor, therefore,
Baltimore’s expenses for emerald ash borer control may resemble the
proverbial canaries that miners used to carry to detect dangerous
methane levels in coal mines.  Whatever damage the EAB inflicts on the
ash trees of Baltimore is likely just a harbinger of other invasive
species problems yet to come, social and public costs yet to be
determined.

[*BACK IN CHARM CITY: Baltimore DSA Launches Sept.
20*](http://dsadc.org/back-in-charm-city-baltimore-dsa-launches-sept-20/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Jonathan Phipps*

Come join us Sunday, Sept. 20 at 2 p.m. for an open house and kickoff
event for the Baltimore chapter of the Democratic Socialists of America
(DSA).  Be a part of an interactive presentation designed to portray,
shape, and frame the role and function of the DSA within the city of
Baltimore for years to come.  Learn how you can be a part of positively
changing the social and political reality not only within the city of
Baltimore, but within American society as a whole.

The event is at [*Red Emma’s*](https://redemmas.org/about) — bookstore,
coffee house and home to radical civic engagement since 2002. At 30 W.
North Avenue, it’s just a [*four-block walk from Baltimore Penn
Station*](https://www.google.com/maps/place/Baltimore+Penn+Station/@39.3101614,-76.6164962,17.25z/data=%214m2%213m1%211s0x89c80495223aa3af:0x6fb7ba2c722eb72a?hl=en),
accessible ([*even on
Sunday*](http://mta.maryland.gov/marc-weekend-service-0)) by MARC train
from DC and the Maryland suburbs.

The Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) is the largest socialist
organization in the United States, and the principal U.S. affiliate of
the Socialist International. We are activists committed to democracy as
not simply one of our political values but our means of restructuring
society. Our vision is of a society in which people have a real voice in
the choices and relationships that affect the entirety of our lives.

Baltimore is a vibrant and dynamic city that, due to recent events, is
in the midst of a crossroads culturally, socially, politically, and
economically.  The DSA hopes to ensure that the path taken from these
crossroads is one conducive to and even influenced by democratic
socialism and its advantages.

Come learn about Democratic Socialism and the DSA, and how you can be a
part of changing Baltimore and America for the betterment of all working
people.

For people traveling by MARC:

1.  Take the Penn Line to Baltimore Penn Station.

2.  Upon exiting the station take either St. Paul Street or N Charles
    Street three blocks north.

3.  Make a right or left turn onto North Ave.

4.  Arrive at “Red Emma’s,” 30 W. North Ave.

[*DC STATEHOOD- “Ambassadors” to Spread Message of
Disenfranchised*](http://dsadc.org/dc-statehood-ambassadors-to-spread-message-of-disenfranchised/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

Beginning this autumn, specially trained volunteers will reach out to
visitors to the District of Columbia to educate them about how citizens
living in the nation’s capital – with all of this shrines and monuments
to democracy and freedom – are denied the basic citizenship rights that
residents of all 50 states enjoy.

The Stand Up! for Democracy in DC Coalition, a nonprofit organization
that conducts public education in support of the goal of DC statehood,
will send statehood “Ambassadors” around the District – to tourist
sites, national conferences, marches and rallies, and other locations to
spread the word about the lack of democracy here and why DC statehood is
the solution.

The “Ambassadors” project, supported by a DC government grant, will
build on a survey of visitors to DC conducted two years ago by Stand
Up!  That survey (conducted by volunteers, including members of Metro-DC
DSA) found that most people were unaware that the District lacked voting
representation in Congress and control over its own budgets and laws,
and that when informed about this lack of democracy, 73 percent of
respondents supported statehood for the District.

Ambassadors will attend a brief training session and given guidance on
how and where to spread the statehood message.  Members and friends of
Metro-DC DSA interested in serving as Ambassadors should contact Bill
Mosley at [*billmosley@comcast.net*](mailto:billmosley@comcast.net).

[*DOLORES HUERTA - Her Life and Work Celebrated in Smithsonian
Exhibit*](http://dsadc.org/dolores-huerta-her-life-and-work-celebrated-in-smithsonian-exhibit/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

Dolores Huerta is best known as a labor leader – a co-founder, with
Cesar Chavez, of the United Farm Workers union – but her life and work
took place at the intersection of several of the critical movements of
the 20^th^ century.  In addition to her labor organizing, Huerta made
substantial contributions to the movements for Latino/Latina rights and
for women’s empowerment, as an exhibition at the Smithsonian’s National
Portrait Gallery makes clear.

“[*One Life:  Dolores
Huerta*](http://www.npg.si.edu/exhibit/exhhuerta.html)” is a small
exhibit – its approximately three dozen photos and artifacts fit neatly
into one modest-sized gallery – but it is rich in images and memorabilia
that tell the story of one of the significant labor leaders of our
time.  The earliest photo is of a seven-year-old Huerta with her brother
in California, and the exhibit traces her life through her being awarded
the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Obama in 2012.  The medal
itself is displayed next to a photo of the president awarding the medal
to Huerta, who is smiling like one of life’s winners.

She has a right to smile, for over her 85 years Huerta – who is an
honorary chair of Democratic Socialists of America – fought and overcame
obstacles one by one.  She rose from an impoverished childhood in rural
California to become a co-founder of the Community Services
Organization, one of the earliest Mexican-American self-help
organizations.  It was through the CSO that she became acquainted with
Chavez, and the two founded the National Farm Workers Association – the
predecessor to UFW – in 1962. Chavez initially discouraged Huerta from
playing such a large role over concern that her domestic
responsibilities – she was at this point divorced with two daughters –
would distract her from union duties.  Huerta, however, was not
deterred.  In the photos from these years her expression is determined
and focused, including a shot of the founding convention of NFWA in
which men cluster around Huerta to sign up for the union.

In the NFWA and later the UFW, the charismatic Chavez was the spokesman
and public face of the union, while Huerta handled public relations and
other organizational duties.  But she sometimes stepped into the
spotlight, where she often spoke to female workers – as she is pictured
in the exhibit – and served as a special inspiration to women seeking,
like Huerta, to balance activism and family.  She also was a fierce
negotiator at the bargaining table, leading one grape grower to grouse,
“Dolores Huerta is crazy.  She is a violent woman, where women,
especially Mexican women, are usually peaceful and calm.”

The exhibit doesn’t hide the difficulty and danger Huerta faced as a
labor activist.  She often lived hand-to-mouth and relied on donations
of food and clothing from union members.  One member knitted her a
sweater emblazoned with the UFW “black eagle,” and the exhibit features
both a photo of her wearing the sweater, and the sweater itself.  A 1988
photo shows a grim-looking Huerta in the hospital, Chavez by her side,
after she was beaten by San Francisco police during a demonstration and
suffered a ruptured spleen and fractured ribs.  She was eventually
awarded an \$825,000 settlement, and the incident led the San Francisco
police to revamp their crowd-control procedures.

But there also are images of triumph, including the events leading to
UFW’s successfully achieving a contract with California grape growers in
1970.  While Chavez embarked on a 25-day hunger strike in 1968 to
dramatize the farm workers’ plight, Huerta worked the media and the
political establishment.  Two photos in the gallery show Huerta with
Robert Kennedy as Chavez ended his fast.

A silkscreen portrait of Huerta by Barbara Carrasco captures its
subject’s essence:  kindly yet firm, visionary yet down-to-earth.  Or
perhaps Huerta’s own words, printed on the gallery wall, capture her
best:  “Don’t be a marshmallow.  Walk the street with us into history. 
Get off the sidewalk.  Work for justice.”

“One Life:  Dolores Huerta” will be at the National Portrait Gallery
until May 15, 2016.

[*FORWARD TOGETHER FOR DAYS OF GRACE: A Long March for Justice
Continues*](http://dsadc.org/forward-together-for-days-of-grace-a-long-march-for-justice-continues/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Kurt Stand*

Labor Day has sometimes been a militant demonstration in solidarity with
striking workers, sometimes used to proclaim the beneficence of
corporate capital.  At times a vehicle for expressions of independent
worker political action, more often it has been a tool for mainstream
politicians to talk without substance about popular need.   Occasionally
used to express opposition to war, commonly it is turned into a holiday
to celebrate “Americanism.”  Frequently a fun parade or time for a
family outing, the holiday’s history thus ignored, the day marking the
transition from summer to autumn with back-to-school sales, and final
seasonal trips to the beach.   Or, in other words, Labor Day reflects
the changing trends in US society and attitudes amongst union members. 
So it is little wonder that this year the holiday has become an
opportunity to forcefully and publicly connect demands for economic,
social and racial justice – to assert workers’ voice in the fight to
give meaning to a democratic system under assault from all sides.

Just such a connection is being made by Local 1442 of the International
Longshoremen’s Association (ILA) which issued a call for a Labor Day
action in its home city of Charleston, South Carolina in response to the
mass shooting of parishioners at the “Mother Emanuel” AME Church in June
and the police slaying of Walter Scott in April.  The call states in
part:

Guns inflicted the fatal wounds of April and June, but racism, poverty
and the politics of rancor and discord have long inflicted grave wounds
on the state’s poor and most vulnerable people.  This Labor Day weekend,
people of faith and conscience will come together in Charleston to
remember our fallen friends and to reflect on the racism and hatred that
lay at the root of their deaths, as well as the violence that tears away
at the fabric of our communities.

Specifically, the gathering will call for an end to racist violence and
the transformation of our commemorative landscape – our monuments,
markers and historic sites — to fully reflect South Carolina’s
traditions of diversity and democracy.  We will also come together to
honor Clementa Pinckney and to affirm the moral principles that he stood
for as pastor and public servant.  These include:

An end to discriminatory policing\
Expanded voting rights\
A living wage and collective bargaining rights for all working people\
Affordable healthcare and Medicaid expansion\
Quality education as a basic human right\
An end to gun violence. . . .

If you believe that an injustice anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere, and if you understand that what happened at Emanuel AME has
implications far beyond Charleston, and if you believe that we can build
a movement together to save South Carolina’s soul and the soul of the
nation, then join us as we proclaim “Forward Together, Not One Step
Back.”

“Forward together” is the watchword of the movement that emerged in
North Carolina in 2013 after that state’s legislature used the Supreme
Court’s elimination of key enforcement provisions of the 1965 Voting
Rights Act to pass one of the most restrictive voting laws in the
country.  Such restrictions disproved the argument that federal voting
rights protections were not necessary –but of course, the local power
structures that sought their elimination knew that full well.  Moral
Monday demonstrations, organized by the NAACP in alliance with a host of
labor, civil rights, women’s, student, faith-based and other
organizations have taken place weekly since then throughout the state. 
Currently, the NAACP and its allies are in the midst of an 860-mile
national march.   Begun August 1 in Selma, Alabama and now in North
Carolina where marchers will rally and demonstrate up through Labor
Day.  They will then continue until they reach the Halls of Congress in
Washington DC on September 16.  This “Journey for Justice” is advocating
the following:

the right of every American to a fair criminal justice system

uncorrupted and unfettered access to the ballot box

sustainable jobs with a living wage

equitable public education

Demands that are similar to those in Charleston because the needs of
working people in North Carolina, South Carolina, and across the nation
are similar.  And, although expressing the needs of the present, they
also draw on the history of movements to defend democracy by fighting
racism and exploitation.  One of the initiators and principal leaders of
the Moral Monday movement, Rev. William Barbour of the NAACP, in a
tribute to Julian Bond, spoke of today’s struggles as a continuation of
those in the past.    Noting that the first Reconstruction – begun
during the Civil War and buried with the 1896 *Plessy vs. Fergusson*
case which allowed for the legal apartheid Jim Crow system of
segregation, and the Second Reconstruction – begun when activists took
to the streets to make real the Supreme Court’s *Brown v. Board of
Education* in 1954. That ruling undid the legal basis for such
segregation but was then buried under the weight of the racist “Southern
Strategy” of George Wallace and Richard Nixon. It left tasks unfinished
– and so created the need for a Third Reconstruction; Barbour reminds of
what that legacy consists:

When Black soldiers came home from Vietnam describing the atrocities
they had seen the U.S. commit against the tiny country’s non-white
peasants, it was not long for Julian and SNCC to begin protesting these
atrocities. Soon the Georgia Legislature, dripping with the money being
spent by the U.S. military across Georgia, decided Bond’s truth-telling
could not be tolerated in the legislature and ejected him from his
hard-won seat. Without skipping a beat, Julian and SNCC took the attack
on him as an opportunity for turning the *southern U.S.* anti-racism
movement into a *southern hemisphere* movement against the racist
policies of the U.S. and European nations toward native, non-whites. …

Americans are the targets of a conscious dumbing down by tea party
extremists, who are dependent on their twisted versions of world events
and history. Their cruel policies would be immediately rejected if our
kids were taught accurate history in our public schools. This problem
led to Julian’s full support of the *Eyes on the Prize* film. …

Brother Bond, in 1998, was persuaded to lead 64 civil rights veterans
who sit on the Board of Directors of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People. Julian Bond never let us down in our
efforts in North Carolina to revive SNCC’s strategy of non-violent
direct action from the moral high ground.  He gave us confidence to
experiment with different ways to welcome our Brown and White sisters
and brothers to the central struggle against racism. …

Now, Brother Julian, you get a well-deserved rest. … You will be present
within us as we walk in the NAACP’s *Journey for Justice* through North
Carolina on the way to D.C. to demand a comprehensive Voting Rights Act,
that five Justices—liquidating history—eviscerated a couple of years
ago.  As the Journey passes ALEC’s offices in Northern Virginia, a
factory of poisonous boiler-plates of cruel laws for southern states to
pass against the poor, disenfranchised, poorly schooled, LGBTQ, labor,
immigrants, women, and every group of people excluded from accumulating
capital in the avaricious economic-political system that is playing its
trump card once again, you will be with us. We can hear you saying from
the clouds: AMERICA. Shuffle the letters and you get: I AM RACE.

The history of the Civil Rights movement is not a history of constant
advance, of constant victory.  Defeats came often, because the strength
of the existing power structure made it hard to maintain unity, made it
difficult to determine when to compromise, when to stand firm, how to
build coalitions.  Yet it is a history filled with real victories from
which people can learn – as the Journey for Justice and the Call for
Grace each reflect. Significant in both is the central role labor unions
are playing, a role they have not always played.

In the late 19^th^, early 20^th^ centuries, many unions in the South
wanted to drive blacks out of the work force, and most accommodated
themselves to the privileged side of disunity once segregation became
the law of the land.  But there was ever and again resistance to such a
world.  African American longshore workers in the turn of the century
created the basis of for a united black and white union within the AFL
in New Orleans at the height of the era of lynching and repression.  Yet
though striving for unity, they refused to be silent about their own
dignity – and so when, in 1902, the Central Labor Council organized a
whites only Labor Day, a Black Labor Day parade was also organized for a
number of years.  Meanwhile, any cracks in the wall of exclusion were
seized upon, as when the New Orleans building trades held a joint
black-white Labor Day parade in 1910, and when the Socialist Party
organized a mass rally of black and white workers on behalf of the
McNamara Brothers (arrested in 1911 for using dynamite during a
California strike).  The interracial ILA – apart from the miners unions,
the only such AFL union at the time in the deep South — survived
numerous conflicts and attempts to break its unity and strength up until
the Depression.  Later in the 1930s, Communists and other radical
leftists in the National Maritime Union insisted on integrated union
hiring halls throughout the country, where it was unpopular and where it
was illegal to do so, and fought off police, vigilantes, gangsters and
employers to uphold the practice.   Although the unity in struggle
suffered a setback during the early years of McCarthyism and the Cold
War, the labor/civil rights nexus gained a new lease on life during the
Second Reconstruction Rev. Barbour spoke about – as witnessed in
Charleston itself after a successful three month strike led by Local
1199 organized the city’s hospital workers in 1969.

All this forms the background to the militancy of Kenneth Riley and his
fellow dockworkers, despite conservative times and a conservative
national union.  In 2001, when challenging the lack of democracy in the
ILA, and its related neglect of the interests of black workers because
the union refused to confront the threats posed by global capital, Local
1422 members protested non-union work performed om the Charleston
waterfront.  Provocations led to picket line battles with the police –
and the arrest of Riley and 4 other dock workers.  A solidarity campaign
ensued, the 5 were eventually cleared of all charges.  Riley went on to
become president of the Local, an International Vice President of the
ILA, and still a fighter for union democracy and union defense of
workers’ rights on and off the job.  It is this background that led to
the call for action after the murder of nine church goers.

But the Labor Day rally is not only a call for abstract ideological
reason.  One of the local’s 800 members lost a son and an aunt in the
massacre at Emanuel A.M.E. Another member is the brother of Walter
Scott, the Black motorist who was shot in the back by a North Charleston
policeman April 4.   It is that reality which all labor should remember
this Labor Day and all days thereafter, while heeding Riley’s words to
an ILA national convention:

We cannot simply mourn the dead and talk about reform – we must act and
these Days of Grace is a powerful demonstration of action.

Action that returns meaning to Labor Day by organizing to end the
“racism and hatred … the violence that tears away at the fabric of our
communities.

 

Quotes:

ILA Local 1442:

Charleston’s Days of Grace Call to Action —
[***http://www.daysofgracecharleston.org/***](http://www.daysofgracecharleston.org/)

 

America’s Journey for Justice List of Demands:

North Carolina NAACP —
[*http://www.naacpnc.org/journey\_about*](http://www.naacpnc.org/journey_about)

 

Rev. William Barber on Julian Bond:

[*http://www.naacpnc.org/?utm\_campaign=stmt\_julianb02&utm\_medium=email&utm\_source=naacpnc*](http://www.naacpnc.org/?utm_campaign=stmt_julianb02&utm_medium=email&utm_source=naacpnc)

 

Ken Riley::

ILA News, August 12. 2015 —
http://www.ilaunion.org/ila-local-1422-organizing-labor-day-weekend-charlestons-days-of-grace-loves-work-is-justice/

 

Other sources:

*More than a Flag:  South Carolina Dockers Push Racial Justice Further*,
by Jane Slaughter, **Labor Notes**, August 20, 2015

http://www.ilaunion.org/ila-local-1422-organizing-labor-day-weekend-charlestons-days-of-grace-loves-work-is-justice/

**Waterfront Workers of New Orleans: Race, Class and Politics
1863-1932** by Eric Arnesen (1994)

**Forward Together: A Moral Message for the Nation** by Rev. William
Barber (2014)

**On the Global Waterfront: The Fight to Free the Charleston 5** by
Suzan Erem and E. Paul Durrenberger (2008)

[*GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS- A roundup of recent articles in print or
online*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-a-roundup-of-recent-articles-in-print-or-online/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

As the Sanders campaign settles into a niche in the presidential race,
plenty of critiques of Sanders’s proposed program have emerged.

Bob Kuttner in The American Prospect has one:
[*http://billmoyers.com/2015/07/22/why-liberals-have-to-be-radicals/*](http://billmoyers.com/2015/07/22/why-liberals-have-to-be-radicals/)

Jesse A. Myerson, who’s contributed to *Rolling Stone* and *Salon*,
similarly asks
[*http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/why-doesnt-bernie-sanders-run-on-a-truly-socialist-platform-20150722*](http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/why-doesnt-bernie-sanders-run-on-a-truly-socialist-platform-20150722).
His discussion of the “non-reformist reform” of government-guaranteed
employment as a “last resort” is provocative.  Myerson is scoffed at –
by a [*foam-flecked right
winger*](http://newsbusters.org/blogs/tom-blumer/2014/01/04/jesse-myerson-occupy-leader-turned-far-left-rolling-stone-journalist-exp)
at the snarksite *MRC Newsbusters* – as a journalist manqué and Occupy
Wall Street refugee, a screed included here for your amusement…

More Bernie… here he has an interview with Ezra Klein of *Vox*:
[*http://www.vox.com/2015/7/28/9014491/bernie-sanders-vox-conversation*](http://www.vox.com/2015/7/28/9014491/bernie-sanders-vox-conversation)

 

Here is a mid-August piece from the *Guardian* by Syreeta McFadden with
a close look at the interaction between race and class as illuminated by
the Sanders campaign and Black Lives Matter. “Racism and capitalism are
fire and air. They cannot exist without the other. Social democrats may
ideologically align with black issues and causes on the surface but they
feel loath to apply a critical analysis of racism on the same footing as
their class one.“
[*http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/14/bernie-sanders-must-take-race-seriously-black-lives-matter?CMP=ema\_565*](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/14/bernie-sanders-must-take-race-seriously-black-lives-matter?CMP=ema_565)

In that vein, DSAer Kurt Stand sends along “a few good reads
suggestions:

“This article (which was on Portside) we should definitely highlight:

[*http://mic.com/articles/124427/cornel-west-talks-about-endorsing-bernie-sanders-black-lives-matter-and-donald-trump\#*](http://mic.com/articles/124427/cornel-west-talks-about-endorsing-bernie-sanders-black-lives-matter-and-donald-trump)

This article from Jacobin about Katrina is also good on Charter schools
and is interesting on some of the contradictions in Black Lives Matter…”

[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/08/hurricane-katrina-ten-year-anniversary-charter-schools/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/08/hurricane-katrina-ten-year-anniversary-charter-schools/)

Bernie is getting credit for moving the Dem discourse (and aspirants)
leftward. Who/what else is moving to (or at least finding itself on) the
left? Nelson Lichtenstein in the latest *Dissent* says it’s the labor
movement itself, and to some extent of necessity…
[*http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/nelson-lichtenstein-labor-moved-left*](http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/nelson-lichtenstein-labor-moved-left)

Labor and “alt-labor” are complementary in the struggle. Nikki Lewis of
Jobs with Justice writes in Medium about the need for stable work
schedules to stabilize home and family life:
https://medium.com/@Nikki.Lewis/this-labor-day-d-c-needs-fair-schedules-96a6ae96abed

 

The singular role of criminal justice in the general and campaign
debates poses problems for the wider left project if we don’t
analytically show how they are linked (that’s what we do, as
socialists). Brendan Beck in *New Politics* says “The time has never
been better to show that reducing inequality, providing health care,
creating affordable housing, and reinvesting in schools are all
crime-stopping measures…. If we want an equitable distribution of wealth
we no doubt also want an equitable distribution of safety.”
[*http://newpol.org/content/crime-incarceration-and-left*](http://newpol.org/content/crime-incarceration-and-left)

The role of housing, often looked at as separate from other sources of
inequality, is deeply implicated in the chronically unequal education
system and its effect on life-chances. As school opens, *The Guardian*’s
roundup on school segregation, worse than ever, is damning:
http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/07/school-segregation-black-latino-students-race?CMP=ema\_565

Another chime-in on reducing mass incarceration, this one from a
deeply-supported Urban Institute study released in late August. As you
might expect, there is no magic bullet here either…
[*http://webapp.urban.org/reducing-mass-incarceration/index.html*](http://webapp.urban.org/reducing-mass-incarceration/index.html)

The highly visible financial crisis in Greece is one subject in this
issue – including the dubious behavior of other governments in the
Eurozone, enforcing austerity measures that have hobbled Europe’s
recovery from the Great Recession.  The cultural effect is illuminated
by Laurie Penny in this New Statesman article (via Portside): “The
behaviour of the British and wider European elite towards migrants is
not simple inhumanity. It is strategic inhumanity. It is weaponised
inhumanity designed to convince populations fracturing under
hammer-blows of austerity and economic chaos that the enemy is out
there, that there is an “us” that must be protected from “them.”
[*http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/08/europe-shouldn-t-worry-about-migrants-it-should-worry-about-creeping-fascism*](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/08/europe-shouldn-t-worry-about-migrants-it-should-worry-about-creeping-fascism)

What are the effects of gentrification? Local writer Ajan Brown explores
this with reporting from the District for *NuTribe*, an online
newsmagazine.
[*http://www.nutribemagazine.com/2015/07/03/there-goes-the-neighborhood-gentrifications-impact-on-black-communities/*](http://www.nutribemagazine.com/2015/07/03/there-goes-the-neighborhood-gentrifications-impact-on-black-communities/)

The goal of DC DSA and many other progressive organizations in the
District is to gain statehood for the District to shake off the yoke of
Congress. We make all the reasoned arguments, and eyes glaze over. Then
John Oliver takes on the issue, and virality ensues…
[*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wcnrz5Il9QM*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wcnrz5Il9QM)

Larry Hogan’s GOP administration in Maryland is walking back numerous
environmental regulations set in place in the O’Malley era. Seth Bush,
“Beyond Coal” activist at the Maryland Sierra Club, recounts a hearing
in which state regulators buffaloed a civilian clean air panel and took
the pressure off some of the state’s most polluting coal-fired electric
power plants. It’s from the Progressive Maryland blog, cross-posted from
the Maryland Sierra site:
[*http://www.progressivemaryland.org/hogan\_administration\_backsliding\_on\_clean\_air*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/hogan_administration_backsliding_on_clean_air)

Added from *Portside* and *Labor Notes* Sept. 9: A refrain we’d better
not forget: “Either you’re at the table or you’re on the menu.”
[*http://portside.org/2015-09-08/how-do-we-change-everything-without-pitting-workers-against-planet*](http://portside.org/2015-09-08/how-do-we-change-everything-without-pitting-workers-against-planet)

[*JACKSONIAN AMERICA- The Racism-Profit
Nexus*](http://dsadc.org/jacksonian-america-the-racism-profit-nexus/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

Review of *Jacksonland:  President Andrew Jackson, Cherokee Chief John
Ross and a Great American Land Grab* by Steve Inskeep.  Penguin Press,
New York, 2015.

At a time when race and racism are front and center in the national
conversation, a book about the racial politics of nearly two centuries
ago and how it helped build the America we know today – for both good
and ill – could not be more timely.

And for socialists, the book shows that the quest for profit among white
elites, while not the whole story, was certainly a major factor in the
rise of racism in America and its persistence today.  From slavery to
Jim Crow, to Native American removal and extermination, to scapegoating
of Latino immigrants – all of these systems flourished in part because
there was money to be made in them.

*Jacksonland*, a lively and well-researched book by National Public
Radio reporter Steve Inskeep, shows how the early-19^th^ century drive
to remove Native Americans from the eastern United States – focusing on
the Cherokees – was animated at least as much as lust for their
desirable land holdings as out of pure racial hatred.

For those interested in the story of the Cherokees and their removal
from the East, *Jacksonland* fits neatly on the shelf beside Brian
Hicks’ engaging and well-written *Toward the Setting Sun: John Ross, the
Cherokees and the Trail of Tears* from 2011. Both books bring to light
the story of Ross, whose life was previously as little-known as it is
fascinating.  Although mostly of white ancestry (he was only one-eighth
Cherokee), Ross came to fully identify with the Cherokee Nation.  His
education and knowledge of American government led his people to elevate
him to chief, where he attempted to use the white legal system against
itself to preserve his people and their lands.

While Hicks’ book mostly focused on Ross, Inskeep’s eye is on Andrew
Jackson and his decades-long campaign to drive Natives from the eastern
half of the country.  (Full disclosure:  Inskeep and I are fathers of
children who attended the same elementary school).  Reading Hicks alone
gives one the impression that Jackson’s removal efforts were mostly a
combination of racism and political ambition.  But Inskeep documents
another motive:  Jackson was poised to make big profits by getting rid
of the Cherokees. While serving as an officer in the Army and then in
political office, Jackson was involved in removing Natives from their
lands – by military force, treaty, coercion or trickery – and then using
his connections to procure the land at favorable prices for himself or
his friends and allies.  Jackson “participated in the biggest real
estate bubble in the history of the nation up to that time,” Inskeep
writes.  “Some of his closest friends and allies would colonize the new
country and be installed among its leading citizens.  He was
nation-building” – by dispossessing the original inhabitants of the
land.

The other major player, Chief Ross, despite his mostly white heritage,
became the Cherokee’s greatest defender.  He doggedly insisted on the
Cherokees’ right to stay put, even as many members of the tribe were
bought off and moved west, fearing the cause was lost in the long run –
as indeed it was.  But Ross operated at a time when Indian removal
required at least a fig leaf of legality, and he was successful at
gaining political allies and even winning a landmark Supreme Court case
featuring an opinion by Chief Justice John Marshall that – if American
democracy lived by its own principles –should have ensured that the
Cherokees could keep their land into perpetuity.  But Jackson responded
to Marshall’s decision by reputedly sneering “Let him enforce it” –
possibly apocryphally, according to Inskeep, but the quote did reflect
Jackson’s thoughts and actions.  In the end, the government bribed a
band of Cherokees not representing Ross or his government to sign a
removal treaty, and at that point the land rush was on and the Trail of
Tears was at hand.

Inskeep’s illumination of how money was at the root of Native American
removal and genocide makes it a valuable addition to early American
history.  It also should fuel sentiment for removing Jackson’s portrait
from the \$20 bill, which would be a measure of justice – too little,
too late, but at least a recognition that Jackson is not the hero that
standard histories have made him out to be.

[*NOVEMBER DSA CONVENTION: Metro DC DSA Elects Delegates Sept.
13*](http://dsadc.org/november-dsa-convention-metro-dc-dsa-elects-delegates-sept-13/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By David Duhalde*

The biennial Democratic Socialists of America Convention is happening
this November 13-15 in Bolivar, Pennsylvania! (Named for famed Latin
American liberator Simon Bolivar.)

The gathering couldn’t come at a more important time for democratic
socialism in America. The Bernie Sanders candidacy presents a democratic
socialist candidate to millions of people. This convention will dedicate
a good amount of time to how DSA will respond to this opportunity via
our independent expenditure, *We Need Bernie.*

This conference also offers DSA members a chance to plan for years after
the 2016 elections. Elections come and go, but DSA is here to stay.
Convention delegates will finalize the year-long process to craft and
update a new strategy for our socialist collective.

To be part of these amazing discussions and decision making processes,
you have to be in it, to win it. In other words, you need to be a
delegate!

The Metro DC Local of DSA is entitled to ten voting delegates at the
convention. We are hosting elections on Sunday, September 13th at 2 PM
in the MLK main library branch, 1630 7th St NW, Washington, DC. If you
cannot make it, please let us know ahead of time at
[*democraticsocialistsdc@gmail.com*](mailto:democraticsocialistsdc@gmail.com).
You can run in absentia if you send information and a candidacy
statement beforehand.

To be eligible to serve as a delegate, you must be a DSA member in good
standing (i.e., paid dues). To join (or rejoin),*click here*. We will
finalize our delegation by September 29^th^, per national convention
rules.

Get updates on this and other Metro DC DSA meetings and events on our
[*Meetup site*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/).

[*OBAMA’S CLIMATE PLAN- A Start, But Too Small To Cure the Crisis, Green
Lobbyist Tells
DSAers*](http://dsadc.org/obamas-climate-plan-a-start-but-too-small-to-cure-the-crisis-green-lobbyist-tells-dsaers/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

**The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

**By Woody Woodruff and Andy Feeney**

** **Ben Schreiber, national climate and energy program director for
Friends the Earth US (FOE-US), a progressive green lobbying group, spoke
to DSA supporters at our local chapter’s August general meeting
concerning President Obama’s national climate action plan. 
Unfortunately, the tone of his comments – which he delivered as “Ben
Schreiber,” individual, and not on behalf of FOE-US — was not only
pessimistic, but alarming.

If Schreiber is correct, progressives and green activists face enormous
challenges in the years ahead in getting the U.S. to make the energy
transitions necessary to head off ever-worsening climate change. What’s
more, current political and economic realities make it likely that the
fossil fuel industry and the American economic elite will find ways to
ensure that, if this society ever does anything significant about
climate change, the wealthy will force the less well-off to pay for it —
just as the U.S. government, at a serious risk to ordinary taxpayers,
offered trillions of dollars in loan guarantees to the largest Wall
Street banks when it tackled the 2008 financial crisis.

Yet for now, Schreiber indicated, the government’s best climate action
plan announced to date, even if it can be implemented fully, is
inadequate to make the changes in greenhouse gas emissions needed to
curb global climate change, no matter who pays the tab.  Instead, in
Schreiber’s estimation, the plan President Obama intends to offer to the
upcoming U.N. climate negotiation talks in Paris this December will
continue to impose “climate colonialism” on the poorer and
less-industrialized nations of the planet, while failing to limit
average global temperatures to a level most climate scientists consider
minimally acceptable.

To address the climate change crisis adequately, Schreiber told DSA
members and supporters on Aug. 9, would take “a transformation of our
entire economy – energy, agriculture, forestry, transportation and other
sectors.” It also would entail significant changes in unsustainable,
energy-intensive lifestyles now enjoyed by many Americans.  But at the
government level at this point, Schreiber stated, “No one is talking
about radical lifestyle changes; no one is talking about the rapid
development of renewable energy that we would need” to make the U.S.
economic system environmentally sustainable.

Schreiber spoke to us on Sunday, Aug. 9, less than a week after the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released the so-called Obama
Climate Plan for reducing CO2 emissions by the U.S. electric power
industry.

Under a final EPA regulation promulgated on Aug. 3 — which already has
been denounced as economically ruinous by Republican presidential
candidates, and which is sure to face a flurry of lawsuits by affected
industries — the various states would need to develop individual carbon
emissions reduction programs that, by the target year 2030, would
decrease total power plant carbon emissions in the U.S. by roughly 32
percent compared to 2005 levels.  The new regulation would not require
the states to begin implementing their new carbon emissions reduction
programs until 2020, however, a deadline that the Obama administration
and supporters say would give affected power plants and other industries
ample time to adjust to the rules.

In announcing the new EPA regulation, White House advisor Brian Deese
called the program “the biggest step any single president has made to
curb the carbon pollution that is fueling climate change.”  The
President himself was cited by the BBC as characterizing the new
regulation as one cornerstone of an attempt to ensure that the upcoming
climate negotiations in Paris in early December will result, for the
first time ever, in a global treaty under which all or most nations
agree to take action to bring climate change under control.

“This is our moment to get something right … for our children,” the BBC
on Aug. 3 quoted Obama as saying.

Upon its release, the Obama Climate Plan also was praised by Andrew
Steer, president of the World Resources Institute, by Sierra Club
president Michael Brune, and by Gene Karpinski, president of the League
of Conservation Voters, among other talking heads for big American
environmental groups.  A spokesperson for U.N. General Secretary Ban
Ki-moon told Reuters that the plan shows the kind of “visionary
leadership” needed to make the Paris climate talks successful.

On the other hand, Aljazeera America reporter Ned Resnikoff on Aug. 3
quoted a spokesperson for Greenpeace as calling the plan “an important
step forward … \[but\] woefully inadequate on its own.”  MSNBC, on Aug.
19, [*quoted prominent climate scientist James
Hansen*](http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/obamas-climate-policy-practically-worthless-says-expert)
of NASA as saying that Obama’s actions are “practically worthless” and
“do nothing to attack the fundamental problem.” And *Scientific
American* contributor David Biello, on Aug. 6, called the greenhouse gas
emission cuts mandated by the plan “significant,” but “also not enough.”

If the Obama Climate Plan survives challenges from Republicans, fossil
fuel companies and electric utilities and is fully implemented, Biello
wrote*,* carbon emissions from the U.S. electricity production sector as
of the year 2030, when the plan is fully implemented, still will
contribute 1.7 billion metric tons of carbon to the atmosphere each
year.

That’s “more than the combined emissions of the entire economies of
Germany and the U.S. today,” Biello noted.  In addition, Biello’s
*Scientific American* piece stated, U.S. electric power plants fueled by
natural gas-fueled in 2030 will still be emitting around 722 pounds of
carbon dioxide for every megawatt of energy generated, which will add
further to atmospheric CO2 burdens that drive destructive levels of
climate change.

Biello’s *Scientific American* piece concluded:  “This plan is likely
the most the US. can do given current political realities and therefore
is an important step, but that doesn’t mean it’s sufficient.”

In his remarks to DSA members, Schreiber echoed the tone of Biello’s
assessment, but with a little more emphasis on the negative.  In
particular, he mentioned two aspects of the plan that have been
virtually ignored in the media, but that Schreiber believes should be of
particular concern to socialists.

The Paris climate negotiation session in December is “already scripted,
and is about money,” Schreiber said.  The U.S., as the wealthiest
capitalist nation on earth, can use its economic power to force smaller
and less developed nations to accede to our climate policies.  What the
U.S. is essentially saying to such countries is “this is not you what
you need, but what we’re willing to do, and you’re going to live with
it.”

Elizabeth Kolbert in the New Yorker described the chief of the UN
Framework Commission on Climate Change secretariat, Christiana Figueres
of Costa Rica, as having a job with “the very highest ratio of
responsibility (preventing global collapse) with authority (practically
none).”

Schreiber added that the total reductions in U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions that Obama is proposing, which Schreiber says would amount to
a 28% reduction over 2005 levels by 2030, would not suffice to limit the
rise in global average temperatures to just 2 degrees C over
preindustrial levels — the maximum temperature increase that many
climate scientists have said can avert serious climate disruptions.  By
way of contrast with what the climate scientists want, human
civilization through its greenhouse gas emissions is currently on
schedule to cause a rise in average global temperatures of up to 6
degrees C.  However, the U.N. climate negotiations underway, along with
the U.S. climate action plan, might limit the temperature rise to around
4 to 6 degrees C.

Unfortunately, Schreiber said, this level of global warming would be
disastrous for much of Africa, render much of Australia uninhabitable
and cause disaster for low-lying island states already threatened by
rising ocean levels.

In promising to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by only 28 percent,
Schreiber said, the Obama plan would essentially force smaller and
poorer nations in the less-developed world to “become more green than we
are.”  To help them bear the cost, richer nations are proposing an
international climate finance mechanism that would insure a “massive
financial transfer to the rest of the world” to allow the U.S. to
“continue our slow transition away from a financial fuel economy.”

Whether the financial transfer mechanism will be adequate, though, seems
unlikely, and parties to the upcoming talks are arguing over how and
when it would come into play.  The U.S. wants developing nations to make
commitments to CO2 reductions before receiving the money, while
representatives of the developing nations want to receive the money
before committing to reductions.  Friends of the Earth in the United
Kingdom has estimated that a “fair share” shift of financial resources
to the developing world as part of a climate deal would cost \$632
billion, or roughly \$63.2 billion annually over a decade.  Whether this
much will be provided is unclear.

On the domestic front, Schreiber warned, there are two contrasting ways
in which the U.S. might make its society and economy sustainable in
terms of climate change and greenhouse gas emissions.  The one,
politically unlikely path that socialists should support is a “massive
democratization of our entire economy,” which among other things would
involve massive development of distributed electricity production
employing rooftop solar systems, as well as a concerted development of
centralized electricity production from renewable energy as well.  This
path would preclude any rapid phasing out of existing nuclear power
plants, to ensure that national greenhouse gas reductions are achieved
in time.

The second, more politically likely way for the U.S. economy to become
climate-friendly, Schreiber suggested, is through the continuing
development of highly centralized energy production controlled by the
rich, who could use the transition to more sustainable energy sources to
ensure “more capitalism.”  Meeting the climate challenge, in short,
“could be an opportunity to democratize our society, or it could be
another case – like the financial crisis – in which we buy \[the wealthy
elites\] out.”

With this point in mind, Schreiber noted that the Carbon Tracker
Initiative has identified some \$3 trillion of wealth, of assets
relating to fossil fuels, “that is going to have to disappear if we are
to solve climate change.”  If all of this \$3 trillion in capital assets
needs to be written off, “who will be left holding the bag?”

Schreiber suggested that some of the big fossil fuel companies and their
major investors, who in some cases may consist of union pension funds
and other seemingly benign institutions, and not merely wealthy
individuals, may well be counting on future government bailouts to get
them to relinquish “stranded investments” in fossil fuels that need to
be written off.  He cited as an example Royal Dutch Shell Oil, which
recently resigned its membership in the ultra-conservative,
climate-denying American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) due to its
supposed conversion to the idea that climate change is a pressing
problem.

Yet despite its resignation from ALEC, Shell is going ahead with plans
to drill for oil in the Chukchi Sea north of Alaska, Schreiber noted. 
It could be argued that this is an insanely reckless business decision,
if Shell expects serious efforts by the nations of the world to reduce
fossil fuel use to head off climate change.  But it is possible that
Shell and other large fossil fuel companies are anticipating that if
they make bad, climate-destructive business investments now, the public
will be forced to buy them out in the future, much as the U.S.
government during the recent financial crisis bought out the big banks.

In terms of trying to head off the more elitist solution to climate
crisis while facilitating a path involving democratization of the
economy, Schreiber said, “The best thing we have going for us is rooftop
solar,” particularly since private investors have found ways to earn
profits from paying for individual homeowners to install such systems on
their homes.  But the private utility industry, seeing a threat to its
own profits in this development, is working through ALEC to block
rooftop solar installation by levying a “line change” on customers with
rooftop solar systems to soak up all the economic benefits that can be
gained from installing a rooftop solar system.  Utility regulators in
Arizona have approved such a system of line charges, and Schreiber
implied that one major battle facing green energy advocates today lies
in preventing other states from following Arizona’s example.

Another big area where a popular fight against the fossil fuel companies
is occurring concerns resource extraction activities, as demonstrated by
current organizing campaigns against fracking and the Keystone XL
pipeline, as well as Shell’s drilling plans for the Arctic.  Schreiber
said the volume of potential CO2 reductions at stake in battles against
resource extraction activities is not necessarily greater than
reductions in CO2 emissions that might be gained in some other ways, but
popular support for the anti-extraction fight makes it an obvious
priority for activism.

What areas of change are best to organize around? Schreiber named the
military, the single biggest emission source; consumer behavior; airline
emissions; and factory farming.  In addition, climate justice campaigns
against practices that impact vulnerable communities can gain public
sympathy.

The grim reality is that “nobody’s talking about significant lifestyle
changes,” Schreiber said, even though there is no question that in the
United States, at least, “there’s no question that our entire lifestyle
is based on the exploitation of slave labor and the \[unsustainable\]
use of cheap energy.”

In reply to questions, Schreiber identified several progressive and
helpful information sources about climate change and climate change
activism that DSA members and other progressives might turn to for the
latest climate developments.  They include FOE-US itself, Greenpeace,
the web site of 350.org, the Climate Justice Alliance, and the Labor
Network for Sustainability.  Schreiber also recommended the UK
Guardian’s recent series of articles on energy extraction, *Energy and
Environment* (available only by paid subscription), The Smog Blog, and
the Huffington Post.  Other attendees at the meeting also recommended
the online group SumofUs and *Power to the People.*

[*ORGANIZING FOR THE FUTURE- Progressive Prince George’s Introduces
Itself*](http://dsadc.org/organizing-for-the-future-progressive-prince-georges-introduces-itself/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Kurt Stand*

*I was born by the river in a little tent\
Oh and just like the river I’ve been running ev’r since\
It’s been a long time, a long time coming\
But I know a change is gonna come, oh yes it will*

Sam Cooke’s lyrics, beautifully sung by meeting participant Jennifer
Lucas, gave voice to the spirit that animated the nearly 100
participants – community and faith-based leaders, social justice and
labor activists, and a few elected officials — at the Progressive Prince
George’s Launch Party and Interest Meeting.  Held August 13 at the UFCW
Local 400 Building in Landover, the event was sponsored by Progressive
Maryland as a step toward building a unifying progressive organization
in the county (similar initiatives will take place in Montgomery County
and Baltimore).   Issues such as the foreclosure crisis – which remains
a crisis in the County especially amongst African American homeowners –
inadequate public education, a broken criminal justice system and the
lack of access to quality jobs are representative of the concerns that
brought people to the meeting.

And these were the concerns keynote speaker Pastor Delman Coates (Mt.
Ennon Baptist Church) noted that he heard expressed multiple times
during his travels through the state while running for Lt. Governor on
Heather Mizeur’s ticket in last year’s gubernatorial race.  A leader in
the fight for civil rights, he also was a leader in the referendum
campaign for marriage equality and in the current struggle for voting
rights.  In fact, during his speech, he urged all who could to attend
his church the following Monday when Rep. John Lewis was to speak about
the work done to win the Voting Rights Act in 1965 and the work still
needed to maintain it today.  He concluded with a moving remembrance,
from the not so distant days of extreme poverty and segregation in the
South, of a woman holding the door open at a bus rest stop so that youth
who didn’t have a dime could use the facilities.  And that was the
message: we must do all we can to open and hold open doors that still
exclude if we are to have a just society and a true democracy.

Progressive Maryland’s interim Executive Director Larry Stafford spoke
in a similar vein, pointing out that change comes about when we act, and
he spoke of his own experience encountering police violence when still a
teenager as pushing him into a life of activism – of speaking up and
speaking out so that injustice never goes unchallenged.  He talked of
the need to change our country’s priorities at home and abroad, by
working for an alternative where we live.  The goal, one activist wrote,
was to “fashion a self-managing populist organization concentrating on
neighborhood issues and bringing accountability to local government.”

Local activism and organizing was the heart of the meeting. Four
Progressive Prince George’s community leaders introduced and led
breakout sessions on the priority campaigns:

-   Better public and official control of police behavior, especially
    excessive force, uneven treatment of minorities, and resort to
    gunfire rather than calming situations. Activists involved in the
    PPG breakout session later testified to a [*General Assembly body
    considering
    changes*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/activists-want-changes-to-police-officers-bill-of-rights/2015/08/24/a9eac2ee-4a38-11e5-9f53-d1e3ddfd0cda_story.html)
    to the Law Enforcement Officers’ Bill of Rights (LEOBOR), which
    famously has protected officers accused of unjustified killings in
    states and cities around the nation. Christian Gant and LaCole Foots
    led this session.

-   Neighborhood control of appropriate development and improving the
    approval process for projects, which now can shut out affected
    neighborhoods in the county’s relentless search for a commercial
    tax base. The immediate concern was a Walmart in a residential area
    along Annapolis Road, which organized neighbors are fighting before
    the District Council. Jennifer Dwyer led this session.

-   A pending Paid Safe and Sick Leave bill that will come before the
    Prince George’s County Council in September. A strong bill was
    passed in Montgomery County earlier this year with skilled advocacy
    from the statewide Working Matters Coalition, of which Progressive
    Maryland is a member. Activists seek an equally strong bill to set
    the stage in Maryland’s two largest counties for advocacy on a
    statewide bill, the latest version of which will bring sick leave
    legislation before the General Assembly for the fourth
    consecutive year. Linda Saffel led this session.

 

Stafford, in a closing appeal, mentioned many other issues that the
organization would tackle, including workers and human rights, income
inequality, environmental justice, peace and alternative economics. But
the focus, he said, will be developing a grassroots organization that
allows Prince Georgians to work collectively on their frontline, local
concerns. That organization, he said, needs to develop leaders while
also always focused on maximum empowerment of people in their
neighborhoods, to be self-motivated rather than top-down.  From that, he
said, would proceed the kind of popular pressure that could require
accountability from public officials in the county and at the state
level as well.

Much work remains to win those battles and to root the organization more
solidly in the county.  A hopeful sign of the potential to do just that
was the presentation of two high school students at the meeting’s end,
with one – Juwan Blocker – declaiming a performance piece that spoke in
equal parts of anger and hope.  A poem expressing sentiments in parallel
with the final verse of Sam Cooke’s song written more than four decades
ago:

*There have been times that I thought I couldn’t last for long\
But now I think I’m able to carry on\
It’s been a long, a long time coming\
But I know a change is gonna come, oh yes it will*

**Woody Woodruff contributed to this article**

[*PERILOUS INSIGHTS- Violence and the Work of Women
Journalists*](http://dsadc.org/perilous-insights-violence-and-the-work-of-women-journalists/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

The annual ritual of honoring our labor also challenges us to consider
the risks that those in the workforce face in their jobs.  The women who
labor in the news industry are among those who face some of the greatest
emotional and physical risks on a daily basis.

A 2014 study by International Women’s Media Foundation and the
International News Safety Institute ([*IWMF,
2015*](http://www.iwmf.org/our-research/journalist-safety/)) found that
two-thirds of the 977 women reporters they surveyed across the world had
experienced violence on their jobs – intimidation, threats of abuse,
actual abuse, and abuse of power or authority.  Of those, the greatest
number said these acts were perpetrated by their own supervisors or
co-workers.

This shocking finding reveals the reality of women in journalism today –
they have made their way into the male bastion of newsrooms, but they
still are not welcome.  Women’s liberation has opened doors, but it has
not yet eradicated deeply institutionalized sexism.

Respondents to the IWMF study also said they encounter abuse from police
and other officials they interact with in the course of reporting.  More
than a fifth said they had experienced physical violence in retaliation
for what they had reported.

The stark episode of CBS reporter [*Lara
Logan’s*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/committee-to-protect-journalists/lara-logan-sees-parallels_b_1638682.html)
on-camera sexual assault by a crowd of men as she covered protests in
Tahrir Square in Cairo in 2011 makes these numbers real, as does a
similar brutal attack against British journalist Natasha Smith soon
after.  Both women detailed their accounts later in news interviews, and
Smith wrote about hers in her blog.

Some women journalists reported being assaulted in one-on-one attacks on
streets or other public places.  About half said they had been sexually
harassed in their workplaces by male bosses and co-workers.  Few of any
of these incidents had been reported – and small wonder because most
news organizations around the world still do not have policies against
sexual harassment.  Neither do companies provide support after their
journalists are harassed or attacked.

The women journalists behind these statistics are the ones who endured
to work on.  Not all were so lucky.

[*Mindy Ran*](http://www.equaltimes.org/mindy-ran?lang=en), a freelance
feminist journalist and co-chair of the Gender Council, International
Federation of Journalists, recounts a long list of women who were
brutally slain in the line of reporting.  Among them were several who
reported on Chechnya, including Elina Ersenoeva, and a few months later,
Russian investigative reporter Anna Politskovskaya, both in 2006. 
Somali writer Horriyo Abdulkadir was shot point-blank by gunman in 2011
who left a note saying “she talked too much.”

Mexico is the most dangerous country in the world to be a journalist
today, particularly for women.  In 2011, Marcela Yarce Viveros and Rocío
González were found naked, bound and gagged and dead after reporting on
official corruption.  That same year, Mexican newspaper editor Elizabeth
Macías Castro was found decapitated by police with a note left by her
killers saying she died for writing about criminal activities on social
media websites.

The Communication and Information on Women
([*CIMAC*](http://www.cimacnoticias.com.mx/sites/default/files/informe_impunidadcimac.pdf.)),
a Mexican feminist news agency founded in 1989 to provide a gender
perspective in journalism, has expanded its activities into advocacy
after many of its writers were assaulted or threatened.  In 2010, CIMAC
increased its investigation and reporting on the murder of hundreds of
young women in the north of Mexico since the 1990s, as well as drug
trafficking and official corruption.

Retaliatory attacks against female reporters escalated followed, and in
2015, CIMAC undertook [*a
study*](http://www.cimacnoticias.com.mx/sites/default/files/informe_impunidadcimac.pdf.)
to track violence against both male and female reporters in Mexico.  The
study documented 13 cases of violence against female reporters in 2010,
39 cases in 2011 and 47 in 2013.  While assaults against Mexican male
reporters increased 276% in the five years examined, assaults against
women increased 2,200%, the report said.  Mexican police have repeatedly
refused to either investigate or make arrests in these cases, or to
protect journalists in their work.

Organizations are also under threat.  CIMAC’s headquarters were
vandalized in 2008, with most of its computers and archives stolen,
after the agency posted stories about the rape of young girls by police
and military soldiers.  The agency’s journalists – like women
journalists around the world – are also stalked and threatened online,
and harassed in their reporting.

Only in recent years have any of the journalism watch groups separated
data by gender in their monitoring of reporters’ safety, and incidents
are believed to be greatly underreported.  Reporters without Borders,
which presently counts women as only 7% of all journalists murdered in
the line of work, believes the actual number to be closer to 13%.

Mindy Ran and other feminist journalists led the campaign in pressuring
the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) and International
Labor Organization (ILO) to advocate for passage of [*Resolution
2222*](http://www.un.org/press/en/2015/sc11908.doc.htm) by the UN
Security Council in May 2015. That measure condemned attacks against
journalists and called on world governments “to create a safe
environment in law and practice for media professionals to do their
work”. In addition, these same activist organizations have initiated a
movement that resulted in the earlier UN General Assembly’s adoption of
the an International [*Day to End
Impunity*](http://www.unesco.org/new/en/unesco/events/prizes-and-celebrations/celebrations/international-days/int-day-to-end-impunity/international-day-to-end-impunity-2014/about-the-international-day-to-end-impunity/)
Against Journalists in 2013.  That resolution pressures authorities to
investigate journalists’ murders and bring killers to justice.  While
not specific to women, these measures will clearly benefit women
journalists, alive and deceased.

Groups like Reporters without Borders, Committee to Protect Journalists,
and Article 19 have also been more pro-active in addressing the
victimization of women reporters.  On International Women’s Day this
year, IFJ called for an end to violence against women journalists.

The most dangerous work for women journalists is and will undoubtedly
remain reporting on men’s violence, whether that violence is
interpersonal assaults like rape or battering, structural violence like
official corruption, or societal violence like war.

Notes:

Carolyn M. Byerly is a member of DC Metro DSA.  She is on the faculty of
the School of Communications, Howard University, Washington, DC.

A version of this article titled “Violence and the Women Who Cover It”
appeared in [**Media Report to
Women**](http://www.mediareporttowomen.com/), Summer 2015 (Vol. 43, No.
3).

[*REBRAND WASHINGTON FOOTBALL- Grassroots Organization Demands A Name
Change*](http://dsadc.org/rebrand-washington-football-grassroots-organization-demands-a-name-change/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

As the new football season gets underway, a grassroots advocacy group is
kicking into high gear its campaign to change the name of Washington’s
National Football League team.

While there has been considerable media coverage of allegations that the
name “Redskins” is a racial slur, and a number of Native American
nations have campaigned for the name change, the new organization –
calling itself Rebrand Washington Football (RWF) – is the first
grassroots, non-Native group to take up the cause of changing the name.
Started by long-time fans Ian Washburn and Josh Silver, RWF thought it
was important to stand in solidarity with Native Americans.

“The name is a dictionary-defined slur. \[Team owner Daniel Snyder\]
says he means no harm using the name,” Silver says.  “However,
throughout history, minorities have been called slurs and insults in
order to justify inferior treatment of them. The team names perpetuates
unhealthy stereotypes. The right thing to do is for Mr. Snyder to change
the name immediately.”

RWF’s principal activity has been a campaign, begun early this year, to
collect petition signatures that will be delivered to team owner Snyder,
showing him that there is substantial popular demand among local
football fans and the general public for changing the name.  Petitions
have been circulated outside Metrorail stations, at street fairs and
community meetings.  The signature total is nearing 1,000 and the group
expects to collect many more.

RWF anticipates delivering the first batch of petitions to Mr. Snyder
and the team in early December as the season is winding down. RWF will
keep collecting signatures and engage in other activities until Snyder
does the right thing, Silver says. In response to previous RWF activism,
the Arlington County Council passed a resolution asking Snyder to change
the name, and Montgomery County will not use the name in official county
communication.

RWF is seeking people interested in circulating petitions in their
communities or workplaces, at transit hubs or any other place people
gather.  Please e-mail
[*billmosley@comcast.net*](mailto:billmosley@comcast.net) if you’d like
to become involved. You can also email RWF at
[*rebrandwf@gmail.com*](mailto:rebrandwf@gmail.com) and you can also
visit the website at
[*http://www.rebrandwf.org*](http://www.rebrandwf.org).

[*ROOTS OF OUR INEQUALITY: Steve Fraser’s Age of Acquiescence and the
search for
solutions*](http://dsadc.org/roots-of-our-inequality-steve-frasers-age-of-acquiescence-and-the-search-for-solutions/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

*** The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; September 2015**

** ***By Lynn Williamson*

Note: This bare-bones summary of the wealth of historical data and
social, political and psychological analysis in **The Age of
Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized
Wealth and Power** by Steve Fraser \[most recent reading by the Metro DC
DSA Book Group – ed.\] is meant to give a prospective reader a brief,
inviting taste of the highly readable, but weighty (literally and
metaphorically) valuable work that lacks only the presentation of a
viable path to get out of our current ever-widening gulf between the
rich and the poor in America.

The book is structurally organized into two merging, mixing but
ultimately diverging eras, both times of rampant inequality between the
rich and the poor: the Gilded Age of the ‘long 19th century” with its
“great noise” of protest, and the current Gilded Age of “great
silence.”  Fraser leads us through the glorification of technical
Progress in the first Gilded Age where industrial capitalism, producing
the miracles of lightbulbs, sewing machines, telephones, emerged via
*“.*..the systematic cannibalizing of various forms of precapitalist
economies and the societies they supported.*”*  Fraser calls this
process “primitive accumulation,” and the wealth of former enterprises
like subsistence farmers, homesteaders, peddlers, craftsmen, small-town
shopkeepers fed into the maw of the factories, machines, railroads,
banks, of industrial capitalism.  Primitive accumulation produced
farmers perpetually in debt or losing their farms; rampant use of leased
convict labor under a southern judicial conspiracy, and what was
emerging as “wage slavery” capital accumulation by exploiting wage labor
in cities.  As Fraser states, *“*Combined and happening at the same
time, the imminent extinction of the family farm and the descent into
the dependency of wage slavery in the cities provided the critical mass
for the unparalleled explosion of anticapitalist resistance that
distinguished the long nineteenth century*.”*

Fraser points out that people steeped in precapitalist ways of life
conflated plutocratic capitalists with the old-world aristocrats, and
that the prevailing resistance language of violence came from a fear of
slavery: *“*…a society that feels it may be living on the precipice of
slavery is a society living on the precipice, on the edge of some final
confrontation.*”*  The rebellions that began to erupt, for example the
1877 national railroad workers strike, were treated by officialdom as a
crime wave perpetrated by brigades of lawless “tramps.”  Racial phobias
were used to denigrate strikers as “savages” and “squaws,” while the
whole power of the legal system backed by government militias to quell
the labor uprisings was commanded by industrial capitalists.  
Meanwhile, the labor movement itself became fragmented by racial and
ethnic hatred and distrust.  As Fraser says, *“*Even while the strikers
were displaying extraordinary courage in facing off against United
States Steel and the vast infrastructure of power it \[the corporation\]
could bring to its defense, the strike became a theater of primordial
tribalism, proving how impossible it was to separate the labor question
from the race question*.”*

Fraser explains that at the end of the long 19th century the reforms of
the New Deal brought a “civilized capitalism.” This tamed version of
capitalism, in conjunction with the rising American standard of living
based on the “progress” of economic growth, *“*…became the solvent in
which all those immemorial hard-edged social antagonisms of the long
nineteenth century would dissolve*.”*  At the same time certain
anti-capitalist words, the language of resistance like “class,”
“exploitation,” “public ownership, or “socialism,” were essentially
purged from the American vocabulary as dangerous in a process of
“linguistic cleaning.”   Americans lost the very words for resisting.

The rise of financial capitalism and the proliferation and glorification
of mass consumerism heralded the second Gilded Age.   This “flexible
capitalism” began to cannibalize the structures of industrial capitalism
throughout America in a process of deindustrialization to provide liquid
funds for the magical “financial engineers” who could turn money into
more money by trading paper assets “…while passing the intermediary
messiness of producing anything.*”*  But as Fraser points out,
“deindustrialization is antiseptic terminology for social devastation*”*
as whole towns and associated jobs, social supports and traditions
*“went down with the smokestacks.”*  What Fraser calls “flexible labor,”
a euphemism for “disposable workers,” became a hallmark of the
finance-driven economy, as did the rise of poverty associated with
low-wage labor in food-service and retail jobs.  Convict labor made a
comeback in support of private enterprise.

During our second Gilded Age, the “…fable of the financier especially
(as well as the techno-entrepreneur) as freedom fighter has made its
unique contribution to that mood of acquiescence..” as has the fable of
the Wall Streeter as “heroic revolutionary.”  Moneymaking was
transformed into “a fearless quest for self-discovery.”  Fraser calls
this transformation, the “mythos of the plutocrat as rebel.”  And these
American rebel plutocrats perfected a populist morph into the
faux-Bubba, appealing to Americans as “a simple country billionaire.” 
Americans could participate in the quest for individuality at the mall
by consuming gear and products “…to create a magical realm in which all
is harmony, happiness and contentment….”  And if you couldn’t afford
this quest for individual expression via consumables, then borrowing,
assuming debt was the answer.  Then, weighted down by debt, addicted to
debt, consumer culture undergirds a state of permanent wage labor.

Meanwhile, flexible capitalism has less need for permanent workers, so a
new labor category emerged: emancipated labor or the free agent,
liberated to “do his own thing.”  Be your own boss; work at home,
leading to longer hours via self-exploitation.  Voluntary servitude was
replacing wage slavery.  As Fraser explains, “…the outlook of neoliberal
flexible capitalism sees the self as the ultimate resource,
self-exploitation another name for self-expression, and the more pliable
and more malleable, the freer.”  This free agency, “the individual
public offering,” of talents and capabilities, however, meant the loss
of economic security, and health and retirement benefits.  Fear and
desperation led to anxiety, dread and docility.  Outside contractors
performed the work previously done inside the company, leading to the
lessening of social ties that benefitted unions.  Those at the poverty
level in this system of economic capitalism put the blame on themselves
as free agents who “made bad choices.” In a telling linguistic
turnaround, the term “parasite” in our current Gilded Age is directed at
the lowly poor, not the bloated, financial capitalist, supported and
bailed out by government welfare.

Finally, as a frightening coda, Fraser sees a pervasive inability for
Americans to even imagine a system outside of capitalism.  He says,
“…the capacity to envision something generically new…has always supplied
the intellectual emotional and political energy that made an advance in
civilized life, no matter how truncated, possible.”  And, horrifically,
“To be grown up in the Age of Acquiescence may be a sign of early-onset
senescence.”  How do we get out of this mess?  Maybe Fraser’s next book
will help.

*&lt;&gt;Editor’s Note: The Metro DC DSA Book Group meets more or less
monthly. Fraser’s The Age of Acquiescence was the topic at the most
recent meeting, and participants agreed it was so substantive it
deserved some further discussion at the next get-together. That’s
Sunday, Oct. 4 at 3 p.m. at the Kogod Courtyard, National Portrait
Gallery, where the time will be split between a further consideration of
Fraser’s book and a read of Ian Haney Lopez,* Dog Whistle Politics:  How
Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented Racism and Wrecked the Middle
Class*. More information and updates are at the Metro DC DSA* [**Meetup
site.**](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/)

[*TRANS PACIFIC TRADEOFF-TPP Vote Now Unlikely Before December,
Opponents
Say*](http://dsadc.org/trans-pacific-tradeoff-tpp-vote-now-unlikely-before-december-opponents-say/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Labor Day 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

A congressional vote on the proposed Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP),
which opponents in a variety of progressive movements have denounced as
a blatant power grab by multinational corporations, is now unlikely
before December of this year.  Due to continuing disagreements over
certain trade and intellectual property provisions among the different
Pacific Rim nations still negotiating the detailed provisions of the
pact, final language for the TPP won’t be available for President
Obama’s signature until this September at the earliest.  Under the
provisions of a “fast track” bill that Obama and congressional
Republicans narrowly managed to pass last summer, Obama’s signature on a
proposed TPP will begin a 30-day period in which members of Congress can
view the document, but not members of the American public.  Then another
60 days must pass in which the proposed TPP is available for inspection
by all before Congress can vote on the proposed TPP and Obama can sign
it into law.

If the different nations hoping to form the TPP can iron out their
disagreements by this month, then, activists within the labor,
environmental, consumer rights, health care advocacy and other movements
hoping to stop the TPP will need to scramble to mobilize enough popular
opposition to it that Congress will vote it down in December.  But some
anti-TPP activists hope that if the TPP negotiators cannot reach an
agreement on the pact’s provisions in time, congressional action on the
TPP will be put off until next year.  Because new “free trade” treaties
have been highly controversial in the US since the 1993 approval of the
North American Free Trade Agreement or NAFTA, it’s likely that the
supporters of TPP will then seek to avoid making it a potential issue in
2016 election campaigns, which probably would mean that supporters would
wait until the lame duck session of Congress in December 2016 to bring
it to a vote.

This at least has been the thinking in two recent anti-TPP conference
calls organized by Andrea Miller of People Demanding Action (PDA-Action)
with support from MoveOn.org organizers around the country, labor and
environmental activists, and the Global Trade Watch program of Public
Citizen.

In an anti-TPP conference call in late August, however, organizers
against the TPP said the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, frustrated by the
continuing inability of Congress and the White House to push the measure
through, may now be pressuring Congress to hold a vote on the TPP by as
early as next March.  It’s likely that this idea will prove unpopular
with the pact’s supporters in both parties who would rather avoid
discussing the pact during an election year, but some TPP opponents do
think that an early 2016 vote on the pact is a possibility.

What is urgently important for TPP foes to do now, activists on the
conference call stated, is to keep up the pressure on Congress and – as
Miller said on the call – to “educate, educate, educate” voters about
the many ways in which the TPP would be detrimental to the public at
large, both in the U.S. and in other would-be signatory countries, such
as New Zealand, Australia, Japan and Malaysia.

Palpable perils to organized labor, consumers, the natural environment
and representative democracy in the signatory nations could flow from
the TPP and from a second pro-corporate trade pact that the Obama
administration is promoting, the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership, or TTIP.  Readers who want more information about TPP and
TTIP and the coalition of activist groups that is contesting them should
visit the Global Trade Watch web site at
[*http://www.citizen.org/Page.aspx?pid=1328*](http://www.citizen.org/Page.aspx?pid=1328%20)
and to the PDA-Action web page on trade, at
[*http://www.peopledemandingaction.org/campaigns/stop-tpp-fast-track*](http://www.peopledemandingaction.org/campaigns/stop-tpp-fast-track)

[*UNPLEASANT FOREGROUND, EVEN WORSE BACKSTAGE- Greece’s mugging by
Europe*](http://dsadc.org/unpleasant-foreground-even-worse-backstage-greeces-mugging-by-europe/)

Monday, September 7th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* – September 2015**

*By Woody Woodruff*

The fast-moving political scenario in Greece, as well as in the Eurozone
that is jam-packed with Greece’s implacable creditors, is taking place
against a backdrop in which reckless lenders of cheap money since the
beginning of the Great Recession have established global hegemony over
sovereign aspirations and continue to reduce their own risk by loading
the responsibility on governments.

As Europe, in particular, struggles with the downside of a single
currency, a North-South Eurodivide has emerged as stark as [*the one
Willy Brandt
identified*](http://www.sharing.org/information-centre/reports/brandt-report-summary)
for the whole global system of national inequality many decades ago.

Greece’s fate is still uncertain, though the scenario that developed by
the end of August was less volatile. The left-wing Syriza party, elected
to govern in early spring, was split severely by the leadership’s
acceptance of an onerous and humiliating bailout deal with the “troika”
representing Greece’s creditors – the European Central Bank, IMF and
European Union. The deal, which had more or less been rejected soundly
by Greek voters in a hastily-called referendum, included the
privatization of public enterprises, even more grinding austerity for
workers and pensioners, tax increases and the insertion of European
Union monitors in Greece’s national government. It was, Ian Parker said
in a *New Yorker* profile of flamboyant Finance Minister Yanis
Varoufakis, “even more severe and humiliating” than the one turned down
by the electorate.

The reluctant acceptance of what Syriza’s Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras
privately called the “blackmailing ultimatum” split Syriza. Tsipras got
the package, with Greek concessions, through the Greek Parliament with
the help of centrist and right-wing parties but lost a big chunk of his
own, which reconstituted itself as an opposition party. Having lost his
working majority, Tsipras strategically resigned, bringing in a
caretaker government and an election, now set for Sept. 20,  that would
be the test of whether he could cobble together a majority coalition
after having accepted a kind of deal he was elected to contest.

Behind that public, political show was the international financial
equivalent of a back-alley beating by bullies. North European members of
the Eurozone, led by Germany, were intent on bringing to heel not only
debt-burdened southern nations in the Eurozone but any left-wing parties
in the common-currency zone that showed fight against the prevailing
winds of austerity-as-debt-relief.

James Galbraith, an economics professor at the University of Texas
(Austin) and frequent critic of austerity in the US and elsewhere, knew
Varoufakis well as a colleague in the UT economics department. When
Varoufakis returned to Greece to join Syriza’s move into government,
Galbraith was close to the action, going to Greece several times this
year as a volunteer consultant. He shows up in Parker’s somewhat
star-struck *New Yorker* portrait of Varoufakis and collaborated on
refined versions of a “Modest Proposal” so-called, a counter-austerity
plan for a Europe-wide Keynesian redistribution of resources to lift
working classes throughout the Eurozone. Not incidentally, this sort of
rump version of the Marshall Plan would aid the sovereign finances and
lives of people in e.g. Italy, Greece and Spain. The “troika” members,
unimpressed, were clearly uninterested in any moves that would bolster
the fortunes of left-wing parties and movements in Europe. Any success
of a left-wing party pushing back against austerity would be a precedent
that the North, Germany above all, would not permit.

This scenario and the politics of the Eurozone were the topic of
Galbraith’s July 28 talk at the Economic Policy Institute in DC. At that
point it was still uncertain whether Greece would defiantly default and
be forced to exit the Euro, or be forced to accept the worst that the
creditors could offer. Galbraith suggested it was a slow-rolling tragedy
that would result in Greece’s acceptance of the terms, since most Greeks
did not want to exit the Euro.

The roots of the Greek financial crisis, Galbraith acknowledged, were
decades during which Greece was “misgoverned” in advance of the first
real confrontation with creditors in 2010. The state had “borrowed
recklessly from reckless banks,” the *New Yorker*’s Parker summarized.
To get even difficult terms, the country was forced to promise lower
pensions and more neoliberal labor conditions, trying to boost what
Galbraith said had been declining productivity coupled with rising wages
and bloated public payrolls. The North Eurozone, often scornful of the
work ethic of the Mediterranean Eurozone members, were “using a small
country as the arena for radical deregulation of the labor market.”

Three governments in succession failed to deliver and fell, and each
time terms became more onerous. Syriza, which Galbraith described as “an
unusual coalition of left forces of all classes,” was elected in early
2015 to fight back.

Meanwhile the public officials in the “troika” worked after 2010 to
shift the debt of Greece and other debtor countries from the reckless
banks who had made the loans to the public’s pocketbook. Dominique
Strauss-Kahn, in 2010 head of the IMF and preparing (pre-scandal) to run
for the presidency of France, overrode his staff and bailed out several
French banks that were seriously overleveraged in the Greek debt. “The
French behaved deplorably,” Galbraith declared. Altogether the bailout
of Europe’s overextended banks amounted to “the most lending in
history.” Once the “troika” officials took over from the banks, they
could apply the squeeze directly. “They only wanted to talk about
tightening,” Galbraith said, instead of being willing to discuss debt
relief – actually writing down principal. This despite the fact that IMF
staffers stated baldly that under the terms applied, Greece’s debt was
[*unsustainable and simply could not be paid
off.*](http://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/30/greek-debt-troika-analysis-says-significant-concessions-still-needed)

As the crisis intensified in June and July, Varoufakis told Parker,
Greece was offered terms that were so unpleasant that it was “the kind
of offer you make when you don’t want an agreement.” In his
conversations with the *New Yorker* writer he suggested that the Euro
group applied humiliating terms, stalled and starved the Greek economy
in order to hurt Syriza’s credibility with the Greek people. He
[*told*](http://inthesetimes.com/article/18339/the-greek-apocalypse-versailles-or-brest-litovsk)
Slavoj Žižek “the Troika is cleverly forcing upon the government
legislation that spreads and entrenches further its own fiefdoms within
the state.” Syriza, he said, to the Euro group is “a government we don’t
want” and their offers were designed to upend the country’s politics –
again. Varoufakis said to the Euro group negotiators, “Don’t crash us.
If you crash us, we’ll end up with some very nasty people taking over” –
still a possibility if Tsipras can’t gain a coalition opportunity out of
the Sept. 20 election.

Certainly the alternative offered in the “Modest Proposal” runs counter
to austerity and the rescue of banks. The plan, which Galbraith
characterized as “pro-European progressivism,” pushes the currency union
gently toward political union with Europe-wide redistributive actions.
Parker paraphrased Varoufakis’s opposition to the 2001 adoption of the
Euro by Greece: “If there was going to be a currency union, then it
should not be half-baked, and should function more like the one that
joins California and Alabama.”

The [*Modest Proposal
stated*](http://yanisvaroufakis.eu/euro-crisis/modest-proposal/5-the-modest-proposal-four-crises-four-policies/):

“We propose that four areas of economic activity be europeanised: banks
in need of ESM \[European Stability Mechanism\] capital injections,
sovereign debt management, the recycling of European and global savings
into socially productive investment and prompt financing of a basic
social emergency programme. … While broad in scope, the Modest Proposal
suggests no new institutions and does not aim at redesigning the
Eurozone. It needs no new rules, fiscal compacts, or troikas. It
requires no prior agreement to **move in a federal direction**
\[emphasis added\] while allowing for consent through enhanced
cooperation rather than imposition of austerity.”

Galbraith suggested that the somewhat divided Euro group was following
the lead of Germany, portrayed in Greece as the villain of the story.
Having been instrumental in the shifting of the Greek debt risk from the
banks to the public, Galbraith said, the German officials were just as
stuck as their colleagues with the consequences of the austerity program
and the unsustainability of the Greek debt. German officials, he said,
had to be thinking “Can you really say to the German taxpayer that we
have made loans that can never be repaid? \[If you do\] wait until after
my career” is finished.

Varoufakis, a Marxist since his school days in England, told Parker that
these events were evidence of structural flaws in capitalism. “Most of
my colleagues in economics think of crises as preventable accidents – a
mistake of some policy – whereas, if you look at the world from my
perspective, capitalism generates them.”

[*WE NEED BERNIE: DSAers work the crowds for socialist
values*](http://dsadc.org/we-need-bernie-dsaers-work-the-crowds-for-socialist-values/)

Tuesday, September 8th, 2015

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.125in"
height="1.75in"}![](media/image3.jpeg){width="3.125in"
height="1.71875in"}

[*DSA members canvassed with fliers for the Bernie Sanders campaign at
the Takoma Park Farmers Market in August, top. Front, left to right are
Bill Mosley and Andy Feeney; second row Ingrid Goldstrom, Kamron Burt,
Carlos McKnight, Woody Woodruff and Merrill
Miller.*](http://dsadc.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/tabling-for-Bernie-at-greenbelt-2015.jpg)

*At bottom, tabling at the Greenbelt Labor Day Festival for DSA and
Bernie: from left, Woody Woodruff, Lisa Foley Stand, Kurt Stand and Lucy
Duff.*
