***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the April 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the April 2014 edition of The Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-april-2014-edition-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Wednesday, April 2nd, 2014

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the April edition of the *Washington Socialist*,** the
monthly newsletter of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America. The
issue was finalized several days into the month to accommodate coverage
of, and perspective on, the April 1 DC primary election, which you can
read immediately below.

There are several time-sensitive events to be noted:

Midwest Academy veteran Steve Max, a DSA vice chair, facilitates a DSA
Webinar next Monday, April 7 at 7 p.m. and again at 9 p.m. The topic is
“Talking About Socialism” and the mission is developing quick-response
answers to questions about democratic socialism and about DSA. It’s the
“elevator speech” but with variations depending on how many floors you
have. Any member in good standing can RSVP to engage with this webinar
on a personal computer at
[*http://www.dsausa.org/calendar*](http://www.dsausa.org/calendar)

DC Metro DSA’s general membership meeting is at 1:30 p.m. Saturday,
April 12 at the West End Library, 1101 24th St NW, Washington, DC. The
closest Metrorail station is Foggy Bottom. The Steering Committee meets
there earlier, at noon, and members are welcome to attend. Visit our
[*Meetup page*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/169466092/) for any
updates. Our “Socialist Salon” discussion group meets at 6:30 Thursday
evening, April 17 at Hunan Dynasty on Capitol Hill, 215 Pennsylvania
Avenue SE. It’s also on our Meetup page, above.

Economist Thomas Piketty, whose new book *Capital in the 21^st^ Century*
has stirred plenty of interest on the left (see reviews in “Good Reads,”
below) will present on his findings at the Economic Policy Institute
Tuesday, April 15 from 9:30-11 a.m. A panel of economics thinkers will
respond to his presentation. If you’re interested, check the [*EPI
website*](http://www.eventbrite.com/e/thomas-piketty-presents-capital-in-the-twenty-first-century-registration-11091213117)
to RSVP.

 

**IN THIS ISSUE**

Bill Mosley reports on DC Councilmember Muriel Bowser’s capture from
Mayor Vincent Gray of the Democratic nomination for mayor – in this
overwhelmingly Democratic city, considered tantamount to election. The
role of money and its corrupting influence may have doomed Gray and
probably has not been removed from the discussion with Gray’s exit.
[*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/ethics-race-overshadow-other-issues-in-dc-primary-election/)

Metro DC DSA endorsed and raised funds for the real progressive in the
race, businessman Andy Shallal, His issues and agenda – continued
widespread deprivation in a prosperous (for now) and gentrifying city
where developers have more clout than ever – emerged to dominate the
discourse and progressives plan to work to keep them there. [*Read
complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/shallal-dsa-members-discuss-vision-for-dc/)

Andy Feeney examines a new report on climate change that models past
collapsed societies and implicates inequality in their demise; with
consequences for our huge but precarious modern global society’s future
as resources are affected by climate. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/eco-collapse-is-a-greater-risk-for-class-divided-societies-suggests-new-study-by-u-md-modeler/)

Kurt Stand reviews a one-man play about Paul Robeson that rocked Arena
Stage recently, with analysis of what the play did and didn’t tackle
about this giant of the twentieth century. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/crossing-the-river-to-the-future-heartbreak-and-hope-in-the-tallest-tree-in-the-forest/)

Dan Adkins looks at Russia’s startling violation of Ukraine’s
sovereignty, what might have brought it on and what a democratic
socialist foreign policy might bring about in this Cold War revival
moment. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/self-determination-for-crimea-and-ukraine/)

**Books**: We take a look at two books with remarkably self-explanatory
titles. Woody Woodruff reviews the new anthology *Imagine Living in a
Socialist USA*. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/i-love-imagining-a-socialist-future-but-the-pesky-how-tos-keep-getting-in-the-way/)

Andy Feeney reviews Andrew Levison’s *The White Working Class Today: Who
They Are, How They Think and How Progressives Can Regain Their Support.*
[*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/can-the-left-regain-the-support-of-the-white-working-class-2/)

As the Maryland legislature approaches its final rush to finish in early
April, Woody Woodruff examines a bill that could have brought industrial
policy and public economic planning to a place at the table in the Free
State – a bill that spooked the top leaders of the House and Senate so
badly that they took extraordinary action. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-legislative-roundup-mike-mike-kill-a-bill/)

In “Good Reads” we feature the UN’s latest IPCC reassessment of the
impact of climate change, reviews of Thomas Piketty’s new book (above)
and an example of how *not* to think outside the capitalist box, among
other tidbits. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-april-2014/)

 

[*Can the Left Regain the Support Of the White Working
Class?*](http://dsadc.org/can-the-left-regain-the-support-of-the-white-working-class-2/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014**\
*By Andy Feeney*

Book Review of Andrew Levison:  *The White Working Class Today:  Who
They Are, How They Think and How Progressives Can Regain Their Support,
Democratic Strategist Press, 201 pages.*

Since Marx coined the phrase in the 1840s, socialists have urged the
“workers of the world” to unite despite national and other differences. 
Here in the United States, labor activists have often found it damnably
difficult to follow this wonderful advice.   At certain times and in
certain places, American radical organizations like the old IWW and the
Communist Party in its “Popular Front” days have won remarkable – though
temporary – successes in getting workers to unite across lines of
religion, race, national origin, and even (to a lesser degree) sexual
and gender differences.   But under other circumstances, racist and
nativist movements and clashing religious beliefs have led many American
workers to support reactionary politicians who lent credence to the
famous boast of 19th century robber baron Jay Gould: “I can hire half
the working class to kill the other half.”

Today, some historically important barriers to working class unity in
this country seem to have fallen, or at least abated, as demonstrated by
the strikingly multi-racial and cross-cultural coalition that supported
Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential run.  Still, the 2008 Obama campaign
only won the backing of 40 percent of white working class voters.   Two
years later, in the 2010 midterm elections, white workers gave the
Democrats just 33 percent of their votes, while the Tea Party surged and
the Republicans recaptured the House of Representatives.

As 2014 midterm elections approach, can progressive or even moderate
Democrats enjoy enough white working-class voters to keep control over
the Senate?  Or will the disaffection of these voters in conjunction
with widespread political gerrymandering help to give the Senate, too,
back to the Republicans?  And over a much longer term, can the left
either inside or outside of the Democratic Party ever win a majority of
working class whites to the ideals of democratic socialism??

In *The White Working Class Today*, progressive researcher Andrew
Levison makes a case that liberal and moderate Democrats, at least, can
indeed regain the support of many working class whites, whom Levison
defines generally as white workers with no more than a high school
education who are employed in a wide spectrum of occupational categories
doing basically blue-collar labor.

Levison argues further that progressives urgently need to regain the
allegiance of such workers, for in his view, working-class whites
constitute one of the most important groups of swing voters in US
politics.   Although the nation’s changing demography means whites
command a steadily dwindling population majority, and are projected to
become a minority in a few decades, it will be many years before
progressives can afford to write off the approximately 31.7 million
white men and estimated 12 million – 20 million white women (the numbers
depend on how certain intermediate jobs are counted) who currently earn
their livings from working class occupations.

If white working class support for Democrats falls back to 33 percent in
the presidential election of 2016,  Levison warns, if it merely matches
what occurred in 2010, the country could see a Republican president in
2017 – a disaster for American progressives and the many different
causes we represent.

In *The White Working Class Today*, Levison draws on a wealth of opinion
polling data and around six dozen scholarly studies of working class
life to inform readers about how white workers as a group have changed
since the 1950s and how progressives need to understand their values and
circumstances in order to communicate with them.  His conclusion is that
moderate progressives can find ways to appeal to these workers, but not
through exactly the same kinds of rhetoric that might have worked with
unionized factory workers in, say, the industrial heartland a few
decades ago.

Levison’s polling data offers much less hope for socialists, at least
for the immediate future.  One key finding is that for the most part,
white working class Americans are cultural traditionalists who strongly
support evangelical and mainstream Christian churches, the US military
and capitalist “free enterprise” as they understand it.   They are
deeply cynical about government as an institution and indeed harbor
intense anger towards it; and they have little remaining belief in
Keynesian deficit spending as a stimulus for economic growth.

However, Levison argues, white working class support for “free
enterprise,” which some surveys put in the range of 80 percent or more,
primarily reflects admiration for small business, which accounts for an
increasing important fraction of working class jobs in the wake of
large-scale corporate layoffs and the flight of factory jobs overseas.  
Many formerly unionized factory workers also have been forced by
circumstances to become small contractors in the construction business,
and have thus themselves become small business owners.    As such, they
often hire close friends and associates who are known to be skilled,
hard workers in order to form teams that can compete successfully for
jobs on residential and non-residential construction projects.

Consequently, workers in the construction business often lack the
hostile feeling towards “the boss” that might have been common in
unionized factories as recently as the 1970s.  Rhetoric about class
warfare has little appeal to them, and they do favor free-market
capitalism as small business owners practice it.

However, white workers have far more negative feelings about large
corporations, especially in the communities of the so-called Rust Belt,
and many feel great anger over corporations’ destroying large numbers of
American jobs through layoffs, factory relocations, automation and
outsourcing.

One reason that hatred for government has almost become a kind of “new
class consciousness” among white workers, Levison notes, is that they
believe – accurately – that the government and the political system at
large have been captured by corporate money and corporate lobbying
power.

White workers also perceive – again accurately – that the corporations
along with the super-wealthy are able to get out of paying their fair
share in taxes.  And while the workers are angry at upper-class greed,
they are even more furious with politicians and the government for
letting it go unchecked.  This offers potential hope to progressives and
socialists working on, say, measures to raise taxes on the wealthy or to
overturn the Supreme Court’s “Citizens United” ruling, since making the
corporations play by the rules is something many white workers favor.

Levison adds, however, that the data show many white workers also hating
and distrusting government because of irksome regulations it has placed
on small businesses, because it sometimes champions such “alien” values
as racial affirmative action, and because they see government as being
corrupt and generally ineffective.  Given these circumstances, white
working class Americans generally reject Keynesian deficit spending,
seeing simply it as a matter of government being undisciplined and
running out of control.  They don’t see how deficit spending might help
to create jobs, and they worry about the government’s debts being
inherited by their grandchildren.

On the other hand, polling data suggests that with the exception of a
hard core of conservative “true believers,” accounting for about 25
percent of white workers, most working class whites believe that pure
unregulated markets are unworkable, and that government must sometimes
intervene to correct the market’s mistakes.  A majority of white workers
apparently also support government investment in the future health of
the country.

Thus a 2011 survey by the progressive group Democracy Corps found that
57 percent of those who answered favored “a plan to invest in new
industries and rebuild the country over the next five years,” while at
the same time 52 percent supported “a plan to dramatically reduce the
deficit over the next five years.”   When asked about the government
both cutting the deficit and “making growth-producing investments in
American industry and small business,” 57 percent of white working class
respondents were in favor.

The numbers suggest that when President Obama, to the fury of many
socialists, proposed a few years ago to cut the federal budget while
simultaneously having the government support various measures to help
the middle class, he was probably on sound political grounds.  To
intellectuals on the left, the economics of Obama’s position were
contradictory and self-defeating, but to many white working class voters
that Obama and the Democrats needed to attract, they may have seemed
like common sense.

There are a wealth of other findings in this book that also may be of
practical and/or theoretical interest to progressive readers.  For
example, Levison points out that widespread support for the Army among
white workers is likely based on the fact that since the end of the
draft, the Army in its front-line troops has become an overwhelmingly
working-class institution.  White workers thus tend to view
controversies over military issues from the perspective of front-line
troops.  Generally this means they need to believe that “the Armed
Forces are doing the right thing.”

However, among white workers there is an important split between those
who believe in the military imposing American values on other societies
by force and “a cautious view that wants to avoid foreign wars unless
genuinely necessary for the security of the United States.”  Thus an
unpublished survey from 2010 found 47 percent of the respondents
favoring a gradual drawdown of US troops in Afghanistan and just 46
percent wanting the US to “stay the course and finish the job in
Afghanistan.”

The divisions within the white working class over the more extreme forms
of US militarism echo what Levison finds about attitudes toward several
other issues of interest to liberals and progressives.    On many
questions, a significant minority or even a majority of white workers
favor the right wing option.  However, a small minority of these workers
are progressives themselves, and a significant fraction of moderate
swing voters occupy the political middle.   Liberals can reach many of
these voters in the middle and get them to support  progressive
positions, Levison argues.  But this is possible only through arguments
that appeal to the workers’ common sense and by avoiding angry or
dogmatic rhetoric in favor of a balanced, “on the one hand, on the other
hand” approach to discussing the issues.

For example, the polling data indicate strong support for religion among
working class whites; however, a majority do not support an exclusive
form of Christianity that finds all other religions to be suspect.  
Similarly, while a large majority of white evangelical Protestants
surveyed a few years ago strongly opposed both homosexuality and
abortion,  almost a third of the evangelicals polled said homosexuals
should be accepted by American society, and 26 percent favored the
legality of abortion in “most” circumstances.   To recruit support for
progressive politics among white workers, Levison concludes, Democrats
need to recruit these moderate swing voters.

Turning to immigration, another hot-button issue, Levison’s data found
large majorities of working class whites opposed to “illegal”
immigration, and deeply offended by the notion of immigrants breaking
the law to enter the US.  Many working class whites also believe that an
irresponsible government is giving favored treatment to undocumented
immigrants – in terms of welfare payments, for example – and find this
outrageous.  A substantial number of anti-immigration respondents also
have viciously racist feelings against Latinos, Levison states; he
doesn’t specify just what fraction.

Yet there are contradictory feelings of empathy for individual
immigrants among some working class people who oppose undocumented
immigrants as a group.   Many white workers who have worked alongside
immigrants in the construction industry also express admiration for
their hard work and loyalty to family – both crucial values for working
class whites.  When given the choice by pollsters, Levison notes, most
working class whites want tougher border enforcement” and an eventual
path to citizenship for immigrants – an arguably contradictory stance
that angers many immigrant rights activists, but one the Obama
administration is apparently echoing.

To gain significant support among white working class voters, Levison
concludes, progressives need to pay careful heed to the political
divisions within this group, then use balanced, common-sense appeals  to
win the moderate middle fraction of these workers to basically tolerant
positions.  What progressives must not do, he argues, is take the
basically arrogant tone that liberal author Thomas Frank, for example,
used a decade ago in *What’s the Matter with Kansas?* (2004).  In that
book Frank suggested that Kansas voters were being seduced by merely
cultural politics into ignoring their “real” self-interest, which Frank
portrayed as almost exclusively economic.  If progressives want support
from white working class Americans, Levison argues, we actually need to
listen to what they think is important, and find ways to respond to it.

The points above are only a few highlights of what recent research as
Levison recounts it shows about white working class attitudes.  The book
also has intriguing things to say about the differing political
implications of Christian radio and country music radio, for instance,
and some detailed discussion of the rather complex attitudes that white
workers bring to politics and economics.  A few ambitious chapters focus
on how progressive groups, like the AFL-CIO’s associate group Working
America, can best do outreach to moderates and even a few Republicans in
the working class.  The book also offers sobering evidence about white
working class attitudes toward most college-educated professional
workers, whom many working class respondents portray as as “cold,”
“arrogant” and overly obsessed with money and career at the expense of
family.

How democratic socialists should or will respond to Levison’s findings
is probably a matter for debate.  Meanwhile, many readers will probably
notice one huge hole in Levison’s documentation of white working class
attitudes.   Except for a few brief remarks about immigration, and
except for noting that white workers in the South are generally much
more conservative than those elsewhere, Levison includes virtually no
data about how white workers today think about race and racism,
especially relating to African Americans.  This is unbelievably large
omission for any serious study of how white Americans of any class think
about society.  With that caveat, however, *The White Working Class
Today* seems like a careful examination of the attitudes that a critical
part of the US electorate brings to politics.  It should be of interest
to many DSA members.

[*Crossing the River to the Future: Heartbreak and Hope in the ‘Tallest
Tree in the
Forest’*](http://dsadc.org/crossing-the-river-to-the-future-heartbreak-and-hope-in-the-tallest-tree-in-the-forest/)

 ***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014**

*By Kurt Stand*

 Slavery is a word simple to say, yet a concept difficult to grasp –
owning another human being, owning someone’s children for life, being
able to sell people on the market like cattle and doing so publicly with
an air of moral acceptability; it all speaks to the abject cruelty that
is a part of our country’s origins. That slavery – racial slavery — was
a central feature of the birth and development of the United States
makes the inequality and level of division and distrust it fostered that
much harder to overcome. And while slavery is in the past, its
continuing impact on our society is a reminder that this past is not so
very distant.

Paul Robeson was the son of a slave, a reality important to remember if
his full measure as a human being and as an advocate for peace and
justice is to be grasped. For the nature of that struggle, the vision of
a democratic heritage and a possible democratic future that was embodied
within his life, is a reminder that beauty and love, equality and
justice are part of our past and can be our future too. We lose much if
all we remember of the past is defeat and suffering. The quality of
resistance can create its own bonds that counter oppression by embracing
the worth of each. Robeson writes of this in his autobiography, *Here I
Stand*:

“It was in Britain – among the English, Scottish, Welsh and Irish people
of that land – that I learned that the essential character of a nation
is determined not by the upper classes, but by the common people, and
that the common people of all nations are truly brothers in the great
family of mankind. If in Britain there were those who lived by
plundering the colonial peoples, there were also the many millions who
earned their bread by honest toil. And even as I grew to feel more Negro
in spirit, or African as I put it then, I also came to feel a sense of
oneness with the white working people whom I came to know and love.

“This belief in the oneness of humankind about which I have often spoken
in concerts and elsewhere, has existed within me side by side by side
with my deep attachment to the cause of my own race. … I do not think,
however, that my sentiments are contradictory; and in England I learned
that there truly is a kinship among us all, a basis for mutual respect
and brotherly love. “ (pp 56-57).

The varied sides of Robeson’s conviction – pride in being black, in his
African roots, his sense of connection with all working people
irrespective of race or nationality, joined by his opposition to those
who live by off the labor of others – are given voice in the *The
Tallest Tree in the Forest*. A one-man tour de force, written and
performed by Daniel Beaty, it was staged at the Arena Stage this winter.
The play’s narrative is a series of flashbacks, with Robeson as an old
man, wounded in spirit and physically frail, looking back on his life of
achievement and commitment. Beaty enacts in one scene the two influences
upon Robeson as a child that he would unite as an adult: the brother who
physically resists racism even in a time when lynching was not unknown,
and his father who taught him the classics so that he could make the
heritage of the world’s learning his own

Robeson went on to be a star athlete at Rutgers in the 1920s, when a
black athlete allowed to play college football was still a rarity. He
then went to law school at Columbia – but the law profession held no
future for him when neither a white judge nor white clients would listen
to a black lawyer. But it was the era of the Harlem Renaissance, and
Robeson, who had grown up hearing and singing spirituals, found his
calling in the songs he sang; his outstanding voice infused his music
with the spirit of resistance and hope. Beaty sings Robeson’s songs
powerfully, allowing us to grasp their yearnings. Robeson’s explanation
of one such song’s meaning is especially poignant:

> From the days of chattel slavery until today, the concept of travel
> has been inseparably linked in the minds of our people with the
> concept of freedom. Hence, the symbol of a railroad train recurs
> frequently in our folklore – in spirituals and gospel songs, in blues
> and ballads – and the train is usually “bound for glory,” and “heading
> for the Promised Land.” And there are boats, too, like the “old Ship
> of Zion” and the “Old Ark” that will take us over the waters to
> freedom and salvation.

Poignant for those words were written when Robeson – like W.E.B. DuBois
— had his passport lifted and was denied the right to travel. Even in
the McCarthy era there were no grounds to charge him at trial, so the
blacklist imposed at home was reinforced by denying his right to go
abroad where people were willing and eager to hear him perform.

Poignant and political. During Robeson’s travels abroad in the 1930s he
achieved a success and stature not yet possible in the still deeply
segregated United States. Encouraged and supported – and prodded and
cajoled – by his wife Eslanda Goode Robeson he became an actor as well;
the limited roles open to him on Broadway were greatly expanded on the
London stage. And during the dozen years abroad his inchoate sense of
rebellion and assertion of dignity in the face of the unrelieved racism
of US society was given a political content. His encounters with Welsh
miners, engaged in their own resistance to poverty and degradation
through collective action and through song, became a pathway to
understanding the oneness of all people’s search for dignity. A trip to
Germany enabled him to see the face of fascism – the face of the mob
manipulated by the powerful in assaults on Communists, socialists and
unionists, on artists and those who don’t fit in, and on Jews. Robeson’s
deep hatred of racism led him to a strong affinity with Jewish
determination to resist anti-Semitism, a bond that would last his whole
life.

He went to Spain during the civil war; he saw in the Spanish people’s
resistance to fascism, saw in the international brigades of volunteers
taking up arms to defend liberty, a model of the brotherhood of
resistance all peoples fighting for a true democracy he sought for in
life. His encounters of people from Africa – a continent then still
almost entirely enchained as European colonies — gave him an
appreciation of the independence struggle he soon made his own with his
leadership of the Council on African Affairs. And from all these his
interest in the Russian revolution, in the Soviet Union grew – and in
his travels there he found an acceptance as a human being that he never
found in the US or in London, found a path of development that embraced
equality that he felt was the path of the future and which cemented his
socialist convictions. The *Tallest Tree in the Forest* recounts this
past and with it Robeson’s decision to put to use the celebrity he
achieved by returning to the United States and fully engaging in the
struggle for social justice in his own land.

And there he achieved a position of acclaim, becoming one of the most
widely known and honored people in the US, a leader in the civil rights
movement, a speaker and singer at numerous union conventions,
demonstrations and rallies, a voice for the war against fascism and for
giving that war content by fighting all forms of discrimination and
injustice at home. And, in a few years, he went from being a political
leader and a popular performer into a pariah, denounced by many who once
welcomed him, listened to him; until he was driven into such isolation
that Robeson became virtually unknown. It is a story that serves as a
reminder of the power of the system to repress those it opposes — the
fears stoked by pseudo-patriots as the Cold War commenced, the
anti-communist witchhunts of the McCarthy-era and the power of racism
all combined in an unforgiving assault to drive Robeson from the public
arena. The two signal events – a speech Robeson gave at the Paris World
Peace Conference in 1949, in which he denounced US racism and the
growing danger of war against the Soviet Union, was distorted into a
statement that US blacks would not fight in such a war. The alleged
statement became an excuse to cause his ostracism, including from civil
rights organizations and unions for whom he had spoken many times in the
past. And with that came threats of violence that turned into action at
Peekskill, New York when a mob whipped up into a frenzy of action,
motivated by the trio of racism, anti-Semitism and anti-Communism,
attacked the crowd of thousands who came to hear him perform. The threat
of such violence led to the cancellation of every other of the hundreds
of concerts Robeson had scheduled, led to the withdrawal of all his
records from radio play or record store sale, and so completed his
isolation. Robeson’s name, photo, awards, were removed from Rutgers’
record books, his name was stricken by the NAACP from the list of its
honorees – he became an “unperson,” in his own homeland.

Attacks which took a toll on him as a human being; the complications of
his support for the Soviet Union as it engaged in its own wave of
repression – and anti-Semitism — that caught some of Robeson’s own
friends in its web is not neglected in the play nor is the personal side
of Robeson’s life – the whole is looked at from his point-of-view as an
older man who wears on his countenance the blows reigned upon him in
those years. Beaty tell the story not only in Robeson’s voice, but in
that of other characters as well and gives a sense of the walls closing
in on him. So it is that he tries to give depth to his portrayal of
Robeson, through playing the role of Essie too — using her unfairly at
times as a foil, as the counter-argument to bring into relief Paul’s
growth and development. By the end of the play, however, Beaty gives
full credit to her courage and depth of understanding. Both are evident
in the following passage from her book, *African Journey*, written after
a trip through the continent in 1945:

> Walls have been built against us, but we are always fighting to tear
> them down and in the fighting, we grow, we find new strength, and all
> their weaknesses.
>
> We have not built any walls to limit our world.
>
> We look at slavery – personal, economic and social slavery – and we
> know that it has done us grave injury. But we have always fought that
> slavery, resisted it everywhere, continuously; and in the fighting, in
> the resistance, we have survived and grown strong.
>
> In fighting a just cause, in resisting oppression, there is dignity.
>
> We look at those who have enslaved us, and find them decadent.
> Injustice and greed and conscious inhumanity are terribly destructive.
>
> Yes, I am glad and proud I am Negro. (pp 151-152)

Those convictions were hers – and his, and, again, give added meaning to
the denial of his right to travel, the attempt to enclose in walls a
life devoted to breaking the barriers that deny freedom.

There are, however, two weaknesses in the play. First, the context of
Robeson’s life and politics is not given sufficient weight. Robeson was
in every respect an exceptional human being, yet he was also a person of
his times – who worked in concert with numerous others. He was part of
the left-wing of the New Deal, part of the hundreds of thousands, of the
millions who tried to stay true to those values when repression set in
and so served as a bridge to the arising movement of the 1960s (even
when he was not personally remembered). Even in defeat, he was never
alone – a fact which should not be forgotten and downplayed.

The other weakness is in a lack of a challenge to the audience – the end
of the play rightly notes the progress made since Robeson’s days, but
does not note how much more progress there needs to be before there we
are a land of equality and justice. We, as audience members, empathize
with Robeson, feel critical of those who abandoned him, honor him for
helping blaze a trail that did result in remarkable changes in recent
decades – yet are never made to feel a connection between the history
told on stage and our present.

It is not enough to sympathize or empathize, rather – it is also
important to act, to take a stand, when it is hardest and most difficult
to do so. It is wonderful to be reminded of a life as beautiful and
committed as Robeson’s but nobody in the audience should have walked
away thinking that this was all in the past. Victories have been won:
Robeson – who died in 1976 — applauded the progress of the civil rights
movement; but racism remains, neo-colonialism remains, wars continue,
the division and exploitation of workers remains – and powerful forces
of repression remain to silence those who speak out. And audience
members should have been made to feel challenged to do more than they
have to end the injustice all around us in the here and now.

Though criticisms don’t take away from the *Tallest Tree in the
Forest’s* strengths – or politics. The second act opens with Beaty as a
“professor,” explaining what causes the state to target an activist.
Speaking out for racial justice can mark a person as a threat to the
system, speaking out for workers rights can do so too. But those who are
advocates for workers rights and racial equality are the people those in
power most hate, fear, attack. And few people embraced those values as
passionately as did Robeson.

Robeson expressed his beliefs in “Ballad for Americans.” It is a song
that speaks to the underlying commonality of all people while
celebrating their distinctiveness. It roots the strength of our country
in the varied forms the labor of working people takes – and defines that
as the content of the democracy to which we should aspire as society, a
democracy at the root of his conception of socialism. It is a vision
expressed in lines Robeson quotes to end his autobiography, a verse from
Pablo Neruda’s *Let the Rail Splitter Awaken:*

Let us think of the entire earth

And pound the table with love.

I don’t want blood again

To saturate bread, beans music:

I wish they would come with me:

The miner, the little girl,

The lawyer, the seaman,

The doll-maker,

To go into a movie and come out

To drink the reddest wine …

I come here to sing

And for you to sing with me.

Sources:

*The Tallest Tree in the Forest*, Written and Performed by Daniel Beaty,
Directed by Moises Kaufman; Arena Stage, January 10 – February 16.

Paul Robeson, *Here I Stand*, Othello Associates, 1958

Eslanda Goode Robeson, *African Journey*, The John Day Company, 1945

Martin Duberman, *Paul Robeson*, Alfred Knopf, 1988

[*Eco-Collapse Is a Greater Risk for Class-Divided Societies, Suggests
New Study by U-MD
Modeler*](http://dsadc.org/eco-collapse-is-a-greater-risk-for-class-divided-societies-suggests-new-study-by-u-md-modeler/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

The *Guardian* newspaper would undoubtedly have displeased conservatives
anyway when it publicized results of a recent computer study concluding
that a fairly large number of “advanced” civilizations throughout
history have fallen victim to large-scale collapse.    Anthropologist
Jared Diamond argued as much in his best-selling 2007 book *Collapse*,
which linked the collapse of the statue-builders of Easter Island and
the eventual disappearance of the Viking settlements in Greenland to the
failure of these societies to recognize environmental limits.  
Collapse’s clear implication was that the advanced society of the United
States, too, is probably whistling past the graveyard.  However, some
other anthropologists challenged some of Diamond’s methods, and anyway,
the basically neo-Malthusian implications of his book are ones that
conservatives have become comfortable ignoring.

The main highlights of the new computer modeling study that recently
attracted the *Guardian*‘s attention, however, were shorter and perhaps
easier to read than Diamond’s longish book.  Also, the study, with
mathematician Safa Motesharrie of the University of Maryland’s School of
Public Policy serving as lead researcher, and U-MD atmospheric
researcher Eugenia Kalnay serving as co-author, focused on two factors
that Diamond had mentioned much more obliquely in his work –  inequality
and social class.

The study, “Human and Nature Dynamics (HANDY):    Modeling Inequality
and Use of Resources in the Collapse or Sustainability of Societies,”
has been accepted for publication in *Ecological Economics*, published
by the scientific publishing group Elsevier.   In it, the joint authors
wrote that while a popular Western belief holds that complex,
technically sophisticated societies virtually never collapse, but can
draw on their strengths to adapt to new challenges, in fact: “Collapses
have occurred frequently in  history, often followed by centuries of
economic, intellectual, and population decline. Many different natural
and social phenomena have been invoked to explain specific collapses,
but a general explanation remains elusive.   In this paper, we build a
human population dynamics model by adding accumulated wealth and
economic inequality to a predator-prey model of humans and nature.”

The details of just what the authors did are a little complex and the
validity of the mathematical equations they used to build their HANDY
model may be beyond the ability of most lay people to follow.   But in
essence, what Motesharrie et al., did was to construct models of how
three different kinds of society might respond to the risks of
civilizational collapse resulting from population growth and resource
depletion, or at least since the rise of city states in ancient Sumeria
several millennia ago.

Examples they cite briefly in the preamble to their study include the
rise and fall of  Sumerian, Akkadian, Assyrian, Babylonian and many
later empires in the Middle East, up through the collapses of the
Ummayyad and Abbasid Empires; the development and decline of repeated
Egyptian dynasties over many thousands of years; the rise followed by
the obliteration of the Minoan and Mycenaean civilizations in the
eastern Mediterranean before the rise of classical Greco-Roman culture;
the rise and fall of the Roman Empire, the disappearance of the Hittite
empire in Anatolia and the Harrappan civilization of the ancient Indus
Valley; the later flourishing and disappearance of the Mauryan and Gupta
empires in India;  the coming and going of historic dynasties in China;
and the “repeated and overlapping” collapses of major civilizations in
Southeast Asia over a period of 15 centuries, culminating with the end
of the Khmer empire of Cambodia in the 15th century AD.\
The historic decline of Mayan civilization in Central America and a
series of complex civilizations in Mexico, along with the evident
collapse of ancient Zimbabwe in Africa, also indicate that the phenomena
of civilizational collapse is not unique to Eurasia, the authors note. 
In fact, at least one scholarly study suggests that when settled
agriculture was first introduced to Europe in Neolithic times, this was
followed “by a boom-and-bust pattern in the density of regional
populations.”  Arguably, the wealth of research on the subject indicates
that rather than civilizational collapse being an unusual event in
history, it may be the rule — rather than the exception.\
.   The three ideal societies being modeled included (1) an “equal”
society in which everyone is essentially a worker, and resources, income
and wealth are equally shared; (2) an “egalitarian” society in which
some people (for example, students) are not workers, but incomes are
basically equal; and (3) an “unequal” society divided between “Elites”
and “Commoners,” in which the Elites capture most of society’s wealth
for themselves, leaving the Commoners earning bare minimum incomes just
adequate for survival.

When the three model scenarios were run on the computer, the results
indicated that all three kinds of society can suffer from civilizational
collapse due to over-population and excessive resource depletion.  All
three societies, when growth rates are optimal, can achieve a “soft
landing” solution where population and resource use both adjust to the
limits imposed by the environment, without major collapse or major
population losses.  All three societies also can “overshoot”
environmental limits and suffer smaller to larger losses in population,
yet then return to sustainable levels of resource use – although at
lower population levels and lower levels of wealth than the “soft
landing” societies achieve.

Yet class-divided, unequal societies in which the Elites command most of
resources and wealth while forcing the Commoners to do all the work, the
study suggests, are far more likely to suffer from long-term collapse
than the other two model societies.

As the authors put it, their modeling indicated two different ways in
which unequal, class-divided societies can collapse:  (a) the Elites can
appropriate so many resources at the cost of the Commoners that the
Commoners starve or stop reproducing themselves, causing an eventually
fatal labor shortage, or (b) the Elites can ensure that the society
exploits too many resources and faces environmental collapse, decimating
Commoners and Elites alike.

The authors note:   “It is important to note that in both of these
scenarios, the Elites —due to their wealth — do not suffer the
detrimental effects of the environmental collapse until much later than
the Commoners. This buffer of wealth allows Elites to continue ‘business
as usual’ despite the impending catastrophe. It is likely that this is
an important mechanism that would help explain how historical collapses
were allowed to occur by elites who appear to be oblivious to the
catastrophic trajectory (most clearly apparent in the Roman and Mayan
cases). This buffer effect is further reinforced by the long, apparently
sustainable trajectory prior to the beginning of the collapse. While
some members of society might raise the alarm that the system is moving
towards an impending collapse and therefore advocate structural changes
to society in order to avoid it, Elites and their supporters, who
opposed making these changes, could point to the long sustainable
trajectory ‘so far’ in support of doing nothing.”

Summing up, the authors further state:  “either one of the two features
apparent in historical societal collapses —over-exploitation of natural
resources and strong economic stratification— can independently result
in a complete collapse. Given economic stratification, collapse is very
difficult to avoid and requires major policy changes, including major
reductions in inequality and population growth rates … However, collapse
can be avoided and population can reach equilibrium if the per capita
rate of depletion of nature is reduced to a sustainable level, and if
resources are distributed in a reasonably equitable fashion.”

These conclusions, of course, are only based on computer modeling, and
computer models are notorious for being sensitive to the assumptions
built into them.   It’s not clear how much faith scientists should put
in the study’s scenarios, nor how adequate the mathematical modeling for
the scenarios really was.  But the *Guardian*‘s March 14 story about the
report, which among other things noted that it was written with
financial help from NASA, drew a furious reaction from some critics, and
in the last few days NASA officials have distanced the agency themselves
from direct responsibility for the conclusions.

Meanwhile the study has sparked a firestorm of debate in the blogosphere
and the media, evoking sharp comments from such varying sources as *The
Washington Times*, *Discover* magazine, progressive commentator Bill
Moyers, the *International Business Times*, the left-leaning
*Independent* in Britain, and a host of others.

*Washington Socialist* readers who are curious about the study and the
controversy it has provoked may want to look at the original paper,
here: 
[*http://www.atmos.umd.edu/\~ekalnay/pubs/2014-03-18-handy1-paper-draft-safa-motesharrei-rivas-kalnay.pdf
*](http://www.atmos.umd.edu/%7Eekalnay/pubs/2014-03-18-handy1-paper-draft-safa-motesharrei-rivas-kalnay.pdf)

The March 14 Guardian blog by Dr. Nafeez Ahmed that brought the study to
the attention of the media is here:
 [*http://www.theguardian.com/environment/earth-insight/2014/mar/14/nasa-civilisation-irreversible-collapse-study-scientists*](http://www.theguardian.com/environment/earth-insight/2014/mar/14/nasa-civilisation-irreversible-collapse-study-scientists).

Dr. Ahmed’s March 212 defense of the study and of his original blog
about it can be read here: 
[*http://www.theguardian.com/environment/earth-insight/2014/mar/14/nasa-civilisation-irreversible-collapse-study-scientists*](http://www.theguardian.com/environment/earth-insight/2014/mar/14/nasa-civilisation-irreversible-collapse-study-scientists). 
  Among other things, this latter blog quotes several prominent critics
of the Motesharrie study and the HANDY model used to derive it; it also
cites a defense of the model and its usefulness by a team led by Dr.
Rodrigo Castro of the Department of Environmental Systems Science at ETH
Zurich, Switzerland.

From a socialist perspective, what is fun to speculate about is to what
degree the study and the controversy about it may influence the politics
of the mainstream American environmental movement, and how.  For much of
the later 20th century, many militant environmentalists were inspired by
the gloomy population theories of Rev. Thomas Malthus, whose famous 1798
*Essay on Population* was explicitly reactionary in its politics. 
Specifically attacking the utopian anarchist theories of William Godwin
and the moderate French revolutionary the Marquis de Condorcet, who had
speculated about the eventual establishment of a peaceful, egalitarian
society through evolutionary means, Rev. Malthus in 1798 argued that
“misery” or extreme poverty was needed to keep poor people from causing
a demographic disaster through having too many children.

Malthus also argued that the twin institutions of “private property” and
economic hierarchy are essential in staving off an over-population
disaster.

But in their study, Motesharrie et al., have put forward a seemingly
logical model of how excessive economic hierarchy and unequally
distributed property should cause exactly the sort of environmental
disaster that neo-Malthusian environmentalists have always wanted to
avoid.   Could this possibly push some traditional environmentalists
toward eco-socialism?

[*Ethics, race overshadow other issues in DC primary
election*](http://dsadc.org/ethics-race-overshadow-other-issues-in-dc-primary-election/)

Wednesday, April 2nd, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014 **

*By Bill Mosley*

Muriel Bowser’s victory in the DC Democratic primary for mayor on April
1 can be largely attributed to District voters’ continued anger at the
string of ethics lapses among elected officials. Unfortunately, the
chatter over whether defeated Mayor Vincent Gray is or is not a crook
forced issues of critical importance to the District – education,
affordable housing, the rise in homelessness, how to achieve statehood –
to take a back seat.

Reflecting Bowser’s victory was former Advisory Neighborhood
Commissioner Brianne Nadeau’s win over four-term incumbent Ward 1
Councilmember Jim Graham. Nadeau ran a largely one-issue campaign,
focusing on Graham’s involvement in a Metro development deal that was
tied to a contract to run the DC lottery. Graham offered his support to
a businessman for a contract to run the DC lottery if he would drop a
bid to work on Metro projects, allegedly as a favor for a campaign
contributor. In past years, Graham’s behavior could be written off as
the kind of routine wheeling and dealing one expects from elected
officials. But with three DC councilmembers having been convicted of
crimes over the past two years and a mayor who may join them, voters had
zero tolerance for anything bearing even a whiff of scandal.

The allegations against Gray, on the other hand, cause Graham’s actions
to pale in significance. The secret “shadow” campaign conducted by
recently convicted businessman Jeffrey Thompson tainted Gray’s 2010
victory and cast a long shadow over the mayor’s entire first term.
Thompson, whose wealth depended on his company’s securing contracts with
the city, spent \$668,000 off-the-books dollars to help Gray defeat
Mayor Adrian Fenty, and after the election the Gray administration paid
Thompson’s health-care company over \$7 million – not a bad return on
investment. However, earlier this year Thompson’s luck ran out when he
pleaded guilty to criminal charges and said that Gray knew all about the
secret campaign, notwithstanding Gray’s claims of ignorance of the
affair. U.S. Attorney Ron Machen has all but promised that an indictment
of Gray is forthcoming.

Bowser has been justifiably criticized for lack of accomplishment during
her seven years on the DC Council, not only by her opponents but by
Council colleagues and the media as well. Her signature issue has been
an ethics bill that she shepherded through the Council in 2012 as she
eyed a run for mayor against a scandal-plagued incumbent. The jury is
out on whether the bill is tough enough to restore the confidence of DC
voters in their elected officials. But Bowser was a questionable choice
for ethics champion, having chosen DC uber-lobbyist David Wilmot as the
chairman of her 2012 re-election campaign. Wilmot also represented
Wal-mart before the DC government, and it was surely more than
coincidence that Bower subsequently voted against the Large Retailer
Accountability Act, which would have required Wal-mart and other big-box
stores to pay a higher wage than the DC minimum. In addition, Bowser
joined the Council as the protégé of former Mayor Adrian Fenty, and
supported his controversial takeover of the DC public school system and
the teacher-bashing policies of Michelle Rhee, Fenty’s appointed
chancellor of DC schools.

That it was Bowser who emerged as the alternative to Gray, rather than
three other councilmembers in the race or progressive businessman Andy
Shallal, who got less than 4 percent of the vote, can be heavily
attributed to race and class divisions in the District. If experience
were the only consideration, Ward 2 Councilmember Jack Evans, with more
than two decades on the Council, would have been the obvious choice.
However, Evans was compromised by his coziness with DC developers and
other business interests and drew only 5 percent of the vote. Ward 6
Councilmember Tommy Wells, who finished third with just under 13
percent, failed to make his vision of a “livable, walkable city”
compelling to more than a core of mostly white newcomers and
progressives. Shallal, who was endorsed by Metro-DC DSA, gained the
support of some progressives, but failed to gain traction as Bowser
emerged as the candidate who could defeat Gray. Councilmember and
perennial candidate Vincent Orange was a non-factor.

Indeed, the results show how race still plays a dominant role in the
District, even with the African American population having slipped under
50 percent and Latinos increasing in number, if not yet in political
influence. Bowser’s base of support was the mostly white western half of
the city, notwithstanding that she herself is African American, while
Gray drew from the heavily African-American eastern wards, although in
smaller numbers than in 2010. This indicates that even white voters are
leery of jumping on the bandwagon of a white candidate, either out of
liberal guilt, concern that race relations could deteriorate under a
white mayor in a city that has never previously elected one, or out of a
strategic decision that a white could not win. Gray, on the other hand –
a resident of heavily African American Ward 7 – tried to paint himself
as yet another black DC officeholder being targeted by the federal
government. His endorsement by Councilmember and former Mayor Marion
Barry, himself targeted 24 years ago by the feds for cocaine use, was
intended to make this connection clear to his base. Unfortunately for
Gray, it was not enough.

Bowser moves to the general election campaign to face David Catania, a
Republic-turned-independent councilmember. Catania jumped into the race
in the hopes that a crippled Gray would win the nomination and be a
relatively easy target in the fall. Bowser’s victory throws a wrench
into that strategy, and he will undoubtedly cast his record on the
council against hers. Yet Catania is asking DC voters to support a
white, openly gay, non-Democratic candidate for mayor – all of which
would be firsts. Catania is a formidable campaigner, but he has a steep
hill to climb.

A mayoral campaign between Bowser and Catania is not one for
progressives to look forward to. One can expect them to promise to
address the critical issues facing the District but fail to present
substantive solutions. DSA members and other progressives can take
consolation that progressive Council Chair Phil Mendelson, who was
endorsed by Metro-DC DSA, will face only token opposition in the fall.
In addition, Catania’s leaving the Council to run for mayor makes his
seat available for a possible campaign by a progressive third-party
candidate or independent. With the general election still seven months
away, there may be an opening, however slim, for progressives to have an
impact.

[GOOD READS for socialists, April
2014](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-april-2014/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014**

&gt;&gt;Well, here’s the bad news we have all been expecting. As
socialists, we view the long-coherence of any society as being
undermined by inequality. A new report spurred by NASA indicates that
the relation of galloping resource consumption and climate change to
inequality worsens both and makes social collapse more likely.

Here’s a summary of the piece in the Guardian:

<http://www.theguardian.com/environment/earth-insight/2014/mar/14/nasa-civilisation-irreversible-collapse-study-scientists>

and here’s a link to a PDF of the quite wonkish original…

[http://www.atmos.umd.edu/\~ekalnay/pubs/handy-paper-for-submission-2.pdf](http://www.atmos.umd.edu/%7Eekalnay/pubs/handy-paper-for-submission-2.pdf)

&gt;&gt;Andy Feeney has vetted the just-released latest assessment of
our climate future by the UN’s panel on climate change; here’s his
summary and links to the full document:

Impacts from global climate change are already evident on every
continent of the world, according to a new report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), and should intensify
through the year 2100 in the absence of strong efforts to reduce human
civilization’s emissions of “greenhouse” gases.   There is still some
scientific uncertainty over just how severely projected climate change
will affect different societies, yet the scientific consensus points to
a “high level of certainty” that it will have a particularly negative
effect on poor people, especially in Africa and southeast Asia.   It
should also cause disproportionate damage to different population groups
as sorted by gender, with women likely to be hurt worse than men; and by
age, with children, the sick and the elderly suffering more than healthy
working-age adults.

The IPCC’s Part 2 section of its Fifth Assessment report, the part
addressing human impacts of climate change, does point to many societies
that are undertaking efforts to adapt to climate change — a hopeful
sign, according to the IPCC’s team of authors.  But there is “high
confidence” that projected levels of change will subject different
societies to several key risks, as well as “medium” confidence that it
will have a host of other negative effects.  The key risks for which
there is “high confidence” of their happening include:  Flooding of
low-lying coastal zones and small islands by storm surges and sea level
rise; inland flooding in urban areas; breakdown of infrastructure and
government services during flooding, storms and heat waves; severe water
shortages and consequent food insecurity in rural and, later, urban
areas from changing climate patterns (all these leading to increased
endemic disease as well as incident mortality); and loss of
biodiversity, habitat and food sources such as fisheries, including by
ocean acidification.\
*New York Times* reporter Justin Gillis on March 31 provided a
hard-hitting, arguably somewhat one-sided account of how bad the IPCC
expects the human effects of climate change to be.   “Nobody on this
planet is going to be untouched,” the Gillis story quotes IPCC chair
Rajendra K. Pachauri as stating.  The IPCC Part 2 report itself is
somewhat less forcefully worded and more filled with qualifications than
the *Times* story, but hardly a cause for great optimism.

For the IPCC’s “Summary for Policy Makers” for the Part 2 report, click
here:

[*http://ipcc-wg2.gov/AR5/images/uploads/IPCC\_WG2AR5\_SPM\_Approved.pdf*](http://ipcc-wg2.gov/AR5/images/uploads/IPCC_WG2AR5_SPM_Approved.pdf)

For access to the full report, organized on a chapter-by-chapter basis,
click here:

[*https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/*](https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/)

**&gt;&gt;Now this is a badread**… not awful in tone and intent, but
exemplary of limited thinking. The writer brings us up to date on
robotics and workplace automation and … can only think of the outcome in
terms of today’s corporate capitalist economy. How would you rewrite
this one?
[*http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/22/robot-jobs-humans-used-to-do-fight-back?CMP=ema\_565*](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/22/robot-jobs-humans-used-to-do-fight-back?CMP=ema_565)

&gt;&gt;Thomas Piketty’s new book on wealth and its consequences is
getting lots of attention, for instance from [*Paul
Krugman*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/24/opinion/krugman-wealth-over-work.html?hp&rref=opinion).
Here’s a review from a reliably radical source, Doug Henwood of *Left
Business Observer: *

[*http://www.bookforum.com/inprint/021\_01/12987*](http://www.bookforum.com/inprint/021_01/12987)

And (added April 3, 2014) here’s the review in the Spring issue of
Dissent by Jamie [*Galbraith: 
http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/kapital-for-the-twenty-first-century*](http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/kapital-for-the-twenty-first-century)

**Note that Piketty will speak at EPI in a morning session on April 15,
followed by a panel on his presentation. You can RSVP to the event; see
the intro to the newsletter… **

&gt;&gt;The Blue-Green Alliance works the troubled seam between labor
and environmentalism with an assumption that it can be reasoned out.
Here’s a link to the latest (April 1) edition of their online blog, The
Source:
[*http://www.bluegreenalliance.org/blog*](http://www.bluegreenalliance.org/blog)

&gt;&gt;As usual, Sam Pizzigati’s “Too Much” keeps us up to date on the
latest examples and outrages of inequality and the elite privilege that
it brings… a guilty pleasure is the “Petulant Plutocrat of the Week.”
Yep, it’s class warfare as if we didn’t know, and here’s the ammunition…
[*http://toomuchonline.org/*](http://toomuchonline.org/)

[*I love imagining a socialist future, but the pesky how-tos keep
getting in the
way…*](http://dsadc.org/i-love-imagining-a-socialist-future-but-the-pesky-how-tos-keep-getting-in-the-way/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

* *

***Imagine Living in a Socialist USA***, edited by Frances Goldin, Debby
Smith, and Michael Steven Smith. New York: Harper/Collins Perennial,
2014. Paperback \$15.99

This is a book that one roots for. The title’s invitation “Imagine
living in a socialist USA” hits the note for those among us who spend,
we may feel, way too much of our time strategizing about how to get to
that blissful condition and not enough time enjoying the thought of
being there.

The writers in this anthology, who offer many good future memories of a
socialist existence, nevertheless can’t seem to wrench themselves from
the same sticking points that bother all of us: What’s wrong with
capitalist society and what can we do to change it? That’s certainly on
our collective minds, and driving us out of them. But I hoped for more
from this book.

Many episodes in this rich compendium do indeed find that sweet spot for
us, and moreover are able to use the anatomy of our hoped-for utopia as
an analytical tool. But there are many cases where the impulse to
explain what’s wrong puts a damper on the imagination of what could be.
The writers, many well-known, appear to be (like many of us) wrapped too
tightly in the struggle to dream as much as promised.

That, in turn, brings the reader to wonder about the book’s audience. Is
the already-convinced socialist activist going to learn new things and
ideas about how to create that socialist future? Without a doubt, though
maybe not a whole book’s worth of new things and ideas. Is the person
who is underinformed about socialism going to be educated and persuaded?
Not so much, though there are several pieces that are unusually
accessible, largely because their format escapes the stereotypical
left-analytic. Most of the arguments here, though tightly written for
the most part, already assume a reader’s tilt toward socialism and some
familiarity with the way the left’s internal arguments are framed. So
the audience is not the curious reader who has not dismissed socialism –
yet – in part because that curious reader has heard little about it.

The editors advise us that the book has three sections: an indictment of
capitalism; imaginative portraits of what a socialist USA might be like;
finally, “how to get from where we are to where we want to be.”

The first section contains only one article, Paul Street’s “Capitalism:
the real enemy.” It mixes feature-style strategies – showing the
destructive effect of capitalism on an individual victim with a face and
name – with critical structural analysis. Like most of the articles in
*Imagine Living in a Socialist USA,* it is solid work. The second
section – imagining the experience of a socialist society – is not that
different, alas. Specific attempts to create the future experience of
socialism with respect to the economy, are hindered by the felt need to
explain what is wrong with the present system. That refrain makes some
of the essays duplicative even though they are individually solid work,
also, and the chance to establish a different vision is dimmed by this
pattern.

Women writers in this section, not surprisingly, break the left-analytic
mold more often, and to good effect. Harriet Fraad and Tess Fraad-Wolff,
as well as Renate Bridenthal, eschew structural analysis and provide
coherent and lyrical paragraphs about a life without capitalist
features: “Imagine feeling safe….. the luxury of time….. life without
capitalist efficiency.” And Bridenthal: “Imagine waking up looking
forward to going to work….. that having children while holding a job is
no problem.” Blanche Wiesen Cook instead offers a tasty history of women
who concretely lived “Dignity, Respect, Equality, Love” including
less-known feminists like Crystal Eastman and Alexandra Kollontai. They
prefigured socialist practice as well as promoting it. More of this
approach would have given this section the flavor that was apparently
intended.

The articles in the second, “Imagining Socialism,” include powerful
strategic arguments despite the section head; many could as easily fall
into section three, “Getting There.” Richard Wolff’s economic critique
notes pointedly that radicals apply their energies to factors outside
the workplace when changing the conditions and relations inside that
most unfree and undemocratic of US situations is a better bet. Wolff
says “…socialists’ critiques of capitalism over the last century have
rarely focused on transforming that internal organization \[the
workplace\] – which shapes how capitalism works or fails to work – to
eliminate the exploitation it engenders.” As he notes, in that workplace
context the relations of production are always in formation – and more
subject, perhaps, to radical action – whereas in the political and legal
realm the dominance of capital is already institutionalized. Democracy
within the workplace could have more bang for the buck than democracy
outside it. Wolff, of course, has elaborated on the theory and the
“actually existing” democratic workplace in *Democracy at Work: A Cure
for Capitalism*.

A powerful indictment of US mass incarceration and alternatives to it
including communal courts is provided by Mumia Abu-Jamal and Angela
Davis in “Alternatives to the Present System of Capitalist Injustice”
and co-editor Michael Steven Smith complements it with an account of how
capitalism and its rulers came to be privileged in the US legal system.
Frances Fox Piven imagines a society that not only abolishes poverty
with public support but abolishes the degradation and loss of social
status that has come to be associated with poverty – a public perception
that maintains capitalism’s grip and enforces class at the same time
that it divides natural class allies.

Arun Gupta shows how food security, better supported by government
regulation, is an avenue to a fully democratized “food sovereignty” and
– because food security is so central to everyone’s lives – a path to
many other democratic determinations within the economy.

The final section, as noted, is often hard to distinguish from the
middle section — articles in both tend to do the same work, setting a
problematic capitalist condition, proposing alternatives. But some are
distinctive. Kazembe Balagun provides the undertold story of socialist
thought and expression within the black freedom struggle, which he calls
the “unfinished chapter” of that struggle. The civil rights movement and
the Occupy movement both, he said, provide “prefigurative spaces” that
show what can be, and electrifyingly quotes C.L.R. James to the effect
that they are “the future in the present.” Clifford D. Connor suggests
the left needs to be prepared for transformational events, and
implicitly raises the question: If the left wasn’t prepared to take
advantage of the meltdown of 2008-09, will it be ready for the next such
opportunity? Diane Feeley elegizes the Detroit that was and argues that
the Detroit that is can revive the plant occupations of the ‘30s and
intervene in cavalier plant closings and the financialist strip-out of
urban resources through from-below popular audits.

Several offerings in the third section stand out as exemplars of
socialism. Most engaging is the science fiction writer Terry Bisson’s
“Thanksgiving 2077: a Short Story.” A family gathers in that future year
to reflect on their roles in a socialist USA and their memories of how
it happened. The table is presided over by grandpa, “an old union man
(IWW 2.0)” who notes “if we had dismantled capitalism sooner, we could
have stopped global warming. Or at least slowed it.” Now, he mourns to
the grandchildren fresh from their jobs (many working off student loans
with public projects) “half your work is damage control.” Fighting
wildfires and evacuating areas being inundated by rising seas –
including, apparently, much of Florida – are typical of the work of
socialism in the latter part of the 21^st^ century. But too, there’s
“commons restoration” – returning land and infrastructure from private
to public ownership – and landfill mining for recyclable plastic “now
that petroleum is under UN interdiction.”

In Bisson’s story, the transition to socialism was not easy – the
narrator’s parents were killed “in the fighting in Philly” and one at
the meal lost an eye in the “Baltimore Courtroom Assault.” One of the
Thanksgiving celebrants, a young scholar, is working on a project
asserting, however, that “the transition to socialism was easier since
the government was more involved with disaster relief than war.”

One thing Bisson’s story obliquely indicates is the price of delay. The
USA of 2077 is not the USA the editors present as the most likely of all
the world’s nations to be a successful socialist society because of its
abundance of resources and skill. The USA of 2077 has lost much of that
luster, and life is spare and limited by consensus – an outcome that can
be seen in its seed in today’s hollowing out of the middle class, the
degradation of education at all levels, and the concrete results of
worsening inequality. Bisson’s future is not a fantasy but the best one
can hope for given present trends. The worst is unimaginable. Michael
Harrington used to tell audiences that socialism was the likely outcome
of most futures, and the question was what kind of socialism –
democratic or autocratic. Bisson’s future narrowly manages the former.

When the writers succeed – and they frequently do – in conveying the
calm, unoppressed and fertile experience of a socialist society, it is
fleeting. “Actually existing” examples are few. As Richard Wolff
observes in his useful contribution, the “lack of a powerful, attractive
and credible vision of socialism is a major block to social movements
against capitalism, despite the inequality, waste and suffering that
system has produced.” (43)

A theme that runs through many of the articles in this book, as it does
through endless conversations in our own DSA organization, is the
question of whether reforms are pathways to a viable socialism or side
trips, dead ends. Joel Kovel dismisses reformist social democracy in
both an article and a poem. “…socialism can no longer be the reformist
social democracy that has betrayed its promise by seeking to perfect
capitalism instead of going beyond it.,” he says in the second section.
And in a poem that ends the book, read to the Occupiers of Zuccotti
Park, he says that “that “your space of occupation is both a site of
resistance and a site of production/. …. You are not here to want what
they want you to want:/ to help out the Democratic Party;/ to get a seat
at the big table;/ to rationalize the deadly regime of accumulation… .”

In fact, the book’s persistent metaphor is the Occupy movement, which
most of the writers explicitly reference. The surreal fact of socialism
existing evanescent in one square in the midst of its mortal foe is an
almost musical refrain throughout, and can be seen as illustrating the
possibility of a socialist life in the midst of the worst of its
opposite, “the future in the present” as C.L.R. James was quoted above.

Depressingly but accurately, though, most of the writers emphasize the
need for a struggle perspective if a future is to be won. Michael Zweig,
speaking prose, tells the Zuccotti Park occupiers in “The Working-Class
Majority” that MLK’s well-known “arc of history…. does not bend by
itself. That is our responsibility.”

*Imagine Living in a Socialist USA* is a collection of excellent, sound
work by thoughtful writers on the left, and most socialists (certainly
this one) will learn an immense amount from its pages. Though there are
individual articles and stories that fulfill the promise of the title,
nevertheless, many are too far into the weeds on the vicissitudes of
life under capitalism and pathways out of it to get successfully to the
full richness of the goal of imagining a socialist future.

[*Maryland Legislative Roundup: Mike & Mike Kill a
Bill*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-legislative-roundup-mike-mike-kill-a-bill/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Less than two weeks remain in the Maryland General Assembly’s 2014
session. Many of the high-salience items for the left – the minimum wage
and earned sick leave bills, for instance – are hovering. The minimum
wage bill was badly roughed up during its passage in the House of
Delegates – indexing and a corresponding raise for tipped workers were
stripped out, notably. The administration’s original bill is still under
consideration in the Senate.

But one bill, which would have opened up opportunities for serious
reform in the state’s ability to plan its own destiny independent of
corporate capitalism, has met an unusually foul end.

[*The bill promoting a Maryland’s Future
commission*](http://dsadc.org/an-update-on-marylands-legislature/) to
develop plans for a post-military economy for the state was derailed in
mid-March by the two top dogs in the Assembly – House speaker Mike Busch
and Senate president Mike Miller. The Commission for Maryland’s Future,
[*a project of Fund Our Communities and Peace
Action,*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-looks-at-formal-state-body-on-defense-transition/)
envisioned a legislative mandate for a study group that would plan for
new tech and and knowledge-based businesses, including alternative
energy production, as a logical successor industry to building
superfluous F-35s for Lockheed. In its inception it would have involved
(gasp!) industrial policy, actual democratic planning, rather than
allowing corporate capitalists to keep on calling the tune for Maryland.
The members of the proposed commission would include academics,
environmentalists and techies, labor and human needs activists and so
forth – as befits a plan from Fund Our Communities, which seeks to wrest
at least some of the Pentagon’s hoard for state and local government and
social needs.

Not a happy place for Mike & Mike, who had the CMF bill summarily
killed. The House Economic Matters Committee, previously insulted by
this correspondent as a “graveyard for good ideas,” provided an
unfavorable report (death sentence) March 3. In the other chamber, it
was nixed March 13 by a unanimous Senate Finance Committee (including by
five co-sponsors of the bill, one of whom was the chairman). Reliable
sources indicate that one of Lockheed’s many registered lobbyists
stirred that pot in the Senate committee.

In its place, and solely by fiat, the two Mikes decreed that there would
be a “private sector commission” that would advise them, that is the two
Mikes, on how to pursue “a joint legislative and business economic
development agenda” that was apparently announced in January to no
fanfare.

And who serves on that commission to advise the two Mikes? Twenty trusty
establishment representatives, four of whom are women but all stalwarts
of the private sector. Even the academics are steeped in the nonpublic
sector; one’s day job is to commercialize and monetize the research of
one of the state’s top research universities. There are six legislators,
none likely to rattle any corporate cages, including one from the
oft-lethal Senate Finance Committee as well as the chair of Economic
Matters in the House. Someone’s quid and someone’s quo, as always.
Environmentalists? Zero. Union reps? One, and no militant. Human and
economic rights advocates? You’ve got to be kidding…

There’s a tie-breaker, too, though it’s hard to imagine these corporate
cronies getting deadlocked on anything. The chairman and 21^st^ member
of this Potemkin study group is – Norm Augustine, a former defense
undersecretary (Reagan era) and retired chairman of… Lockheed Martin .

It appears clear that the Commission for Maryland’s Future, which had a
great deal of momentum in the Assembly, was ‘way too threatening to
Maryland business interests to be spared intervention by those
interests’ best buddies in the assembly, Mike & Mike…

[*Self-Determination for Crimea and
Ukraine*](http://dsadc.org/self-determination-for-crimea-and-ukraine/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014**

*By Dan Adkins*

Self-determination of people was implied in the Declaration of
Independence and was specified as US policy by Woodrow Wilson and
Franklin Roosevelt.  The US has followed this policy except when US
business interests were involved or when the Cold War decided foreign
citizens were acting against “perceived” US interests.  The results of
ignoring other peoples’ views has had the US supporting dictators, the
Iranian coup, ignoring a Vietnam plebiscite, and other actions
suggesting the US is bigger on talking then acting on our ideals.

Now we see a takeover of Crimea by Russian forces despite a treaty
providing security assurance to Ukraine in return for its agreement to
discontinue the world’s third largest nuclear arsenal in the 1990s.
Russia continues to interfere in Ukraine’s internal affairs by sending
armies to its borders and sending Russian ultranationalists into Ukraine
to create problems for the new government, which simply desires to
freely choose Western democratic values and economics.  Russia may be
dissed by former Warsaw Pack nations joining NATO but they had their
reasons.

The coup instigated in Crimea was made by Russian Special Forces without
insignias.  The coup  reestablishes the over 200 years of Russian
control of Crimea.  Although Russian democracy is less a reality than a
formality, in this case, the current majority of the Crimean population
seems to want to join the Russia Federation.

This action startles both the US and the European Union (E.U.) since
it’s the first time since 1945 that land has been forcibly annexed in
Europe.  The fate of Ukraine is not clear.  Russia has proclaimed that
it will look out for Russians being discriminated against.  That
“tactic” was used before World War II by the Germans in Czechoslovakia.

The world got to this place because of several factors. Putin is playing
the strong man, aligning himself with  Russian history.  The E.U. has
dictated terms that Ukraine had to meet to become an E.U. member, thus
forcing Ukraine to choose economically between Europe or Russia.  Russia
has a different opinion since many Russians consider Ukraine the
birthplace of much Russian culture and Ukraine’s population has many
self-identified Russians.  The treatment of Russia by the US as a junior
partner and a loser of the Cold War did not help.

**What Now**?

What would a democratic socialist foreign policy on the Russian-Ukraine
dispute look like?  It would include an understanding of history, not
rushing to war, but probably preparing for actions from a position of
common strength.  It might support a plebiscite on Crimea’s return to
Russia supervised by the United Nations.  One would attempt to use
economic tools and play military options down, but not encourage
adventurism from either side.

Russian history is a tale of a national security state and military that
goes back eight hundred years and includes an almost two-century
occupation by the Mongols or their cousins.  The US has had a serious
standing military force only since 1941.  Russia, unlike the US, has
been invaded by most of its neighbors.  That history suggests that the
ending of the Soviet Union and having the Warsaw Pact countries flip to
NATO was a major change and shock for Russia and may have contributed to
Russia’s current views.  Russia has historically needed and implemented
a strong defense capability that was also used offensively to expand all
the way to Alaska and Afghanistan.  In World War II the US was the
junior partner to the Soviets in fighting the Nazis.   For every
American war orphan there may have been 40 to 60 soviet war orphans. 
That had to have a psychological impact on the Russian mind.  Russia has
a corrupt elite of oligarchs that weakens its economic creativity and
strength of its people and economy.  In the US, our elites often use
their riches to heavily influence elections and legislation.  In Russia
the oligarchs use corrupted officials and extra legal means to eliminate
rivals in addition to using the US elites’ tools.

The absorption of Crimea by Russia is a fait accompli and a round of
sanctions by Europe and the US will result.  So far only individual
oligarchs are targeted.   These sanctions will be at best inconveniences
since there is still money to be made trading with Russia.

However the territorial integrity of the rest of Ukraine is not clear
and the Russian moves are a shock to the security of Europe.  Possible
further moves on the Ukraine require options to be prepared.  Serious
sanctions would require blocking trade but much of Europe depends upon
Russian natural gas.

**Marshall Plan II**

Reviving a Marshall Plan by the US and E. U. could be aimed at long-term
loans to allow some NATO nations plus Ukraine to increase weatherization
and other technologies to be less dependent on Russian gas.  The U. S.
loans would allow nations to buy US energy technologies and thus also be
a stimulus to the US economy.  The aim would be to speed the transition
to renewables and permanently decrease the need for Russian natural
gas.  Creating American LNG exports would only continue demand and would
be undercut by Russian gas when the crisis was over.  Other aids may be
needed in the form of education aimed at creating a less corrupt economy
and political sphere in Ukraine.

The potential for armed conflict over Ukraine seems to be real and steps
should be taken to make this option undesirable.  NATO’s militaries have
been decreasing which may have enticed Russian moves.  The world order
before Russia’s latest move assumed the there would be no conventional
wars or moves at least in Europe.  NATO militaries are configured to
have an expeditionary role in places like Afghanistan and Africa while
having a symbolic conventional role.  NATO militaries have to change to
meet this new challenge.  However there is a way to balance NATO/Russia
military strength without too much cost.

**Lend-Lease II**

The U. S. could loan NATO surplus armored vehicles (US has 8,000 tanks)
to balance Russian arms that have been increasing lately.  The aim is
not to start a war but to make sure that Russia does not see NATO as
disarmed.

The US and NATO have no treaty obligations to defend Ukraine, so it
would be important to signal Russia that NATO is not moving into Ukraine
or being a threat.  The US and NATO need a discussion on what next steps
should be taken if Russia does attack the rest of Ukraine.  Serious
sanctions could create a blow to the Russian economy.  Balancing this
blow would require Russia to reroute its pipelines to China which could
take years.

Staying with the current world borders has allowed many governments to
focus on economic development or internal corruption when the world
needs to focus on climate change and development to raise people from
poverty.  A democratic socialist solution should minimize the
possibilities of war  and maximize sustainable development and
democracy.

A creative diplomatic policy would forgo a winner takes all solution and
treat Ukraine for what it has always been, a gateway between the Russia
and Europe.  However, having Russian armies on Ukraine’s border does not
lend to honest dialogue let alone creative thinking.  Putin’s call to
Obama can be seen as an attempt to undercut Ukraine’s sovereignty by
creating a Russian-U. S. solution.  Hopefully Obama will not fall for
that.  Currently we are left with a diplomatic war of maneuver and the
hope it will not become hot.

*This post was updated April 2, 2014; the final paragraph was revised to
reflect more recent events.*

[*Shallal, DSA members discuss vision for
DC*](http://dsadc.org/shallal-dsa-members-discuss-vision-for-dc/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

About 25 DSA members and friends gathered in Northwest DC on March 30
during a wintry storm to hear DC mayoral candidate Andy Shallal discuss
his vision for the District of Columbia, whether or not he won the
Democratic primary.

The meet-and-greet and fundraising event for the DSA-endorsed Shallal
took place two days before the election that resulted in DC
Councilmember Muriel Bowser winning the Democratic nomination.

Shallal and his campaign manager, Bob Muehlenkamp, spoke of how the
Shallal campaign had “changed the debate” by forcing other candidates in
the race to discuss issues they preferred to ignore, such as economic
inequality, the need for more affordable housing, and how to raise the
academic achievement of low-income and minority students. Shallal also
spoke to a need for a forthright discussion of race and its impact on
life in the District.

Shallal, owner of the Busboys and Poets restaurant chain, said he plans
to remain engaged in DC politics in order to help build a progressive
electoral movement in the District.

The event raised \$1,066 in last-minute cash for the campaign.
