***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from October 2013 Issue**

**Archived November 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Washington Socialist for October 2013: “Shutdown Edition” maybe; more
Congressional misbehavior
certain…*](http://dsadc.org/washington-socialist-for-october-2013-shutdown-edition-maybe-more-congressional-misbehavior-certain/)

Tuesday, October 1st, 2013

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the October issue of *The Washington Socialist*.**

**\
**It’s a little risky, perhaps, to call this October issue the “Shutdown
Edition.” But as we go to “press” the evening of Sept. 30, the Senate
has rejected the House continuing resolution for government funding with
the poison pill that would delay the Affordable Care Act for a year. The
House looks adamant, or comatose. Looks like it might happen. ***\[In
the cold light of day Oct. 1 a.m., when this message was posted on the
site, it is a done deal…\]***

All of us, pretty much, are creatures of the Beltway ambiance and react
like scalded protozoa to each new turn of these events. Whether the
shutdown of the US government takes place on its latest schedule or no,
our psychic environment quivers with the allabout of government and its
attendant politics.

The present writer very recently rode an Amtrak train (both ways)
through what is often and rudely called “flyover country.” Many people
in Ohio, Indiana , Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico and
Arizona also depend on some attention from the federal government, and
many could clearly use more. It is clear that those folks do not spend
as much time obsessing about the latest news, and keep their heads down
and shoulders hunched for the worst when the narcissists of every stripe
posture their way through the routines of misgovernance here in the
capital.

Every town or small city passed by the train showed the signs of
decline– some cities holding on to a local industry and looking less
distressed while others had clearly lost theirs and showed signs of
giving up.

At the apogee of our trip, Grand Canyon National Park – hosting five
million visitors annually – was preparing to close to the public, and
employees (one a family member) are preparing resignedly for furlough.
We may have been among the last people to enjoy the park and its
stupendous views for some time if the non-adult behavior that horrifies
us back in the capital persists.

A stayover in Kansas City, Mo. showed a lovely mini-metropolis, once the
queen of the frontier, trying to hang on to some industrial remnants
that allow a decent living. But areas like what the city calls “Jazz
Hill,” industrial and largely African-American, are treading water only.
The city’s well-managed Main Street Express bus, with 10-minute headways
all day, showcases excellent parks and museums but Jazz Hill is a food
desert served only by an Aldi’s.

The tragedy of the shutdown – and it will be a tragedy – will be muted
in parts of the desert Southwest where scattered ranches show one brick
rambler with attendant shed-like residences, or on Jazz Hill in KC where
many adult men are already unemployed. This new tragedy has to compete
with so many existing ones. The nation’s most vulnerable places and
people have already been abandoned for years by their federal government
and leaders; the shutdown in the distant capital will only be a faint
echo.

IN THIS ISSUE:\
Bill Mosley outlines how the triple threat of sequester, shutdown and
debt ceiling debacle is not only hurting people immediately but works to
destroy trust in government more generally – the core purpose of what
often seems like random behavior by the Right. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=4cbaa19929&e=003de9ccab)

Andy Feeney recounts the sorry path of the Large Retailer Accountability
Act to its veto by Mayor Vincent Gray and a failure to override by the
City Council, and wonders what it will take to convince the general
public that the power wielded by corporations the size of Walmart needs
neutralizing. Is the dismantlement of the “too big to fight” corporate
behemoths a possibility? [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ee7148bb9d&e=003de9ccab)

Daniel Adkins outlines the dismal prospects for progress in Virginia’s
off-year gubernatorial election, with a gerrymandered legislative lineup
in both houses awaiting whomever wins. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=b01aeb460c&e=003de9ccab)

Andy Feeney contributes a book review on Giles Slade’s *Made to Break,
Technology and Obsolescence in America,* which focuses on consumer
electronics and their persistence in our lives and our landfills. [*Read
complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=1d3f059de0&e=003de9ccab)

This month’s “Good Reads” includes a special batch of reports on the
AFL-CIO convention and its turn toward stronger ties with non-labor
organizations. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=4ba8478028&e=003de9ccab)

The recent activities of the DSA local are recounted in a roundup by
Andy Feeney, including our work on student debt issues, peace activism,
the Conyers jobs bill, the LRAA and our participation in the 50^th^
anniversary of the March on Washington. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=b33066e9d6&e=003de9ccab)

DSA Short Takes includes notes by Bill Mosley on the Navy Yard
shootings, Andy Feeney on fossil fuel wars and Dan Adkins on the Snowden
affair. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=698218b01e&e=003de9ccab)

***Metro DC DSA’s next regular meeting is Saturday, October 12,
beginning 1:30 pm at the Martin Luther King Memorial Library. Our next
Socialist Salon is scheduled for Thursday, Oct. 17, usually 6:15 p.m. at
Hunan Dynasty, 215 Pennsylvania Ave. SE on the Hill. You can, of course,
find updates to all these meetings and more on our*** [**Meetup site
**](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ea9c01e7be&e=003de9ccab)***.***

[*Fifty Shades of Vincent Gray: Or, Sleeping With Wal-Mart for Pleasure
and
Profit*](http://dsadc.org/fifty-shades-of-vincent-gray-or-sleeping-with-wal-mart-for-pleasure-and-profit/)

Monday, September 30th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2013**

 *By Andy Feeney*

 Somewhere in my cluttered clothes closet is a rather good-looking
T-shirt I was given in 2010, for canvassing in support of Vincent Gray’s
campaign to be mayor of Washington. I knew virtually nothing about Gray
when I campaigned for him, I confess. But as a DSA member I heeded the
advice of local labor activists who were furious with then-Mayor Fenty,
whose administration had badly undercut the Washington teachers’ union
and imposed huge losses on local cab drivers.

 At the behest of a long-time labor activist on the local DSA Steering
Committee, several members of the Metro DC chapter volunteered to
support Gray as Fenty’s leading challenger. And for my personal stint
going door to door, the Gray campaign people gave me a handsome white
shirt with bright blue lettering, proclaiming their candidate’s superior

 CHARACTER

INTEGRITY

LEADERSHIP.

 I haven’t worn the shirt in public much since the Sulaimon Brown
controversy of early 2011, actually, but now I face a small personal
quandary.

 Following Mayor Gray’s Sept. 12 veto of the Large Retailer
Accountability Act (LRAA) passed by a majority of the DC Council, and
backed by such groups as the Central Labor Council, DC Jobs with Justice
(JwJ) and the community and labor coalition RESPECT DC, what should I do
with this used garment advertising a used-up politician?

 At least from the perspective of labor activists and RESPECT DC
organizers, Vincent Gray as mayor has abandoned all pretenses he may
once have had to showing “Character, Integrity, and Leadership.” At
least to outward appearances, Gray has shafted many of his best labor
supporters from 2010 for the benefit of the world’s largest corporation,
Wal-Mart, which numerous critics have accused of discriminating against
women, paying poverty-level wages in other U.S. communities and
underwriting brutal sweatshop conditions at its suppliers’ factories in
China.

 If Gray has such “character” and “leadership” that he’s willing to
betray the hopes of D.C. labor activists at the behest of a company like
Wal-Mart Stores, what other political atrocities is he also capable of?

 Under the LRAA as supporters proposed it, and as a majority of the DC
Council approved it in a courageous vote taken in July, large retailers
enjoying sales revenues of \$1 billion annually or more, and operating
stores in the District with at least 75,000 square feet of retail space,
would have been required by 2017 to pay their employees a “living wage”
of at least \$12.50 per hour in combined wages and benefits.

\[[*See Mike DeBonis, The Washington
Post*](http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2013-09-12/local/41988960_1_wage-proposal-living-wage-living-wage),\]

 The LRAA would have included a potential exemption for large retailers
who engage in collective bargaining with their workers – an important
selling point for organized labor, and one that might have enabled some
of Wal-Mart’s box competitors, such as Target and Home Depot, some
wiggle room from having to meet the \$12.50 wage requirement
immediately.

 But Wal-Mart Stores is notorious nationwide for fighting against
unionization, and this alone made its pursuit of collective bargaining
as an alternative to paying a living wage unlikely, to say the least.
Nor was Wal-Mart management interested in raising the average wages of
associates it planned to hire in the District, although rival retail
giant COSTCO reportedly pays its workers an average wage of some \$21 an
hour – far more than what the LRAA demanded.

 In an [*op-ed published by the *Washington
Post**](http://news.walmart.com/executive-viewpoints/the-dc-council-has-forced-our-hand)
shortly before the Council vote, Wal-Mart U.S. official Alex Barron
wrote that the LRAA would “would clearly inject unforeseen costs into
the equation” of whether the company would choose to enter the highly
lucrative DC retail market. In fact Wal-Mart threatened to cancel plans
for construction that it had yet to begin on three of the District
stores it had previously planned to open, while possibly pulling out of
three other sites where construction has already begun.

 A majority of the Council led by Chairman Phil Mendelsohn passed the
LRAA anyway, momentarily putting Washington DC in the national headlines
for its courage in standing up to one of the world’s most notorious
corporate bullies. But Wal-Mart’s threat clearly resonated with Gray,
and on Thursday, Sept. 12, he announced his veto of the LRAA, writing to
Mendelsohn that “If I were to sign this bill into law, it would do
nothing but hinder our ability to create jobs, drive away retailers, and
set us back on the path to prosperity for all.”

 Presumably the Council might have taken more time to decide on whether
to overturn the mayor’s veto, but it chose to consider an override
decision at its next scheduled meeting on Tuesday, Sept. 17. Frantic
LRAA supporters worked over the intervening five days to persuade former
“no” voters on the Council to change their positions in order to have a
9-vote majority to override Gray.

 But despite a vigorous e-mail and call-in campaign and a Sept. 17 rally
outside the Wilson Building, LRAA backers lost the override veto, and
Wal-Mart won a significant victory with possibly national implications —
thanks in large part to Gray’s actions.

 At the Sept. 17 rally, activists from several labor, religious and
community groups supporting the LRAA proclaimed that even a defeat on
the measure would be a larger political victory for living wage
legislation in the District.

 Because of public support for the LRAA and widespread controversy over
Gray’s veto, they argued, Gray himself is now promising to propose some
kind of living wage legislation, as are some Council members who killed
the LRAA out of either fear or love for Wal-Mart. Without the LRAA
fight, the activists said, many of these same politicians would have
done nothing on living wage legislation at all; now advocates for
low-wage retail workers at least have a hope of getting a real bill
enacted.

Yet regardless of how the future fight for local living wage legislation
unfolds, many of Gray’s labor allies from 2010 are undoubtedly going to
think of him henceforth as a Benedict Arnold – as a tired,
scandal-tinged politician who out of weakness, cynicism or corruption,
or possibly all three, has chosen to betray low-wage retail workers in
the nation’s capital for the enhanced profits of the largest private
corporation in the world.

 Gray himself has reportedly floated the idea of retiring from politics
in the wake of the LRAA controversy, and some Washington observers say
his political career is effectively finished.

For *Washington Socialist* readers, however, how much shock and surprise
should we feel when Vincent Gray – or for that matter, any Washington
mayor – abandons the public trust when threatened by the world’s largest
retail corporation?

 Giving continued high unemployment in the US, given the fact that
African American unemployment overall is now running at 13 percent,
while the jobless rate for young black people between the ages of 18 and
20 is an estimated 41 percent, how much choice did Mayor Gray really
feel that he had when the world’s biggest corporation threatened to pull
out of several major construction projects in this city, thus
eliminating a number of construction industry jobs?

 Since Wal-Mart, like Ayn Rand’s fictional hero John Galt and his
corporate followers in *Atlas Shrugged*, really does have a great deal
of power to drive local and even national unemployment higher through
investment decisions about where to build stores and where to close
them, how much freedom would even a DC mayor with real “integrity” and
“leadership” have to defy Wal-Mart’s demands?

 Decades ago, in books like *Socialism* and *The Twilight of
Capitalism*, democratic socialist Michael Harrington, one of the
intellectual founders of DSA, concluded that even powerful socialist
leaders can face nearly tragic dilemmas when they win high government
office in a vigorously capitalist society.

 When a politically successful progressive party – like Britain’s Labour
Party before the Tony Blair years, for example – wins governmental power
in a society where much of industry is nationalized, Harrington noted,
the progressive party may well find that it has to run that industry in
a “capitalist” manner, and impose austerity on the workers nearly as
harsh as that prevailing in the private sector.

 But if a strongly progressive or even socialist party takes
governmental power in a capitalist country where most production and
distribution is still in private hands, Harrington concluded that it’s
likely to face an even grimmer choice. Either the socialist governing
party will need to placate the biggest capitalist investors in the
society, for fear of their sabotaging the economy through an investment
strike or production slowdown, or it must run the risk of the
capitalists triggering a recession to punish it for standing by its
principles.

In either case, whether the socialist government knuckles under to
capitalist demands or resists them, it is all too likely to end up
betraying its own working-class supporters. Harrington thought this
potentially tragic choice was likely to plague even smart, courageous
and principled progressives in high office.

 Whether Mayor Gray is especially smart, courageous or principled, of
course, is a question that angry local activists may answer in the
negative. But Harrington’s analysis suggests that even if Gray were a
reincarnation of Eugene V. Debs, Dr. King, and Karl Marx combined, it is
questionable how likely he’d be win any major or lasting victory in a
bare-knuckles contest against the moneyed power of Wal-Mart.

 

If Harrington’s logic and our own recent experience with DC and national
politics both suggest that even a strong and principled leader is likely
to lose against Wal-Mart – as I think may be the case – this should not
necessarily deter local labor activists from electorally punishing Gray
and those DC Council members who voted against the LRAA.

 A betrayal of labor is a betrayal of labor, even when the Benedict
Arnold who joins the enemy has done so under fire, and any one-time
labor ally who turns on his supporters once can probably be counted on
to do so again.

But regardless of Mayor Gray’s role in the LRAA’s defeat, regardless of
whether he turned tail out of corruption or simply out of weakness, the
Sept. 12 veto and the Sept. 17 failure to overturn it should lead
everyone in Washington to question whether the continued existence of
giant companies like Wal-Mart is compatible with the existence of
political democracy – either here, or across the United States.

 Given Wal-Mart’s victory in the LRAA fight, it is arguable that
supporters of democracy should not simply hope for this giant company to
be unionized, possibly through magical means, in future years – although
that’s undoubtedly desirable. Nor should Americans who believe in
democracy merely hope for Wal-Mart to be regulated better by the
government, or for Wal-Mart’s environmental practices to improve –
although these things are clearly important, too.

 What seems obvious from the political experience in the District and
around the US as a whole is that for political democracy to flourish in
our society, giant capitalist corporations like Wal-Mart need to be
dismantled – to disappear, to die as private storehouses of massed
investment capital. At a minimum, companies like Wal-Mart, if they are
not broken up into smaller pieces, need to be nationalized and operated
as public utilities, for only then will their destructive power over
elected governments everywhere be effectively curbed.

 This is an unacceptably “radical” conclusion to draw in US politics
today, of course. It probably does not enjoy universal support even
within DSA, and there is no practical way to act on it in the short
term. But it’s difficult to draw any other logical conclusion in the
District of Columbia, where one ethically compromised mayor seems to
succeed another, without local voters ever seeing political relief, and
where even a law supported by a majority of District residents and
passed by a majority on the Council can be overturned easily by the
lobbying power and economic threats of the biggest corporation in the
world.

 So long as corporations like Wal-Mart can effectively veto the will of
a majority of elected officials in this city, formal political democracy
in the District is nearly worthless, and the city’s residents need to
deal with that fact. How we eventually choose to respond is unclear, but
when Wal-Mart shows that it can make a mockery of local elected
government, we owe this great company the courtesy of learning the
lesson it’s teaching.

[GOOD READS for October: selected articles and links in a radical
vein](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-october-selected-articles-and-links-in-a-radical-vein/)

Monday, September 30th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2013**

Via Andy Feeney, from Carl Davidson’s CCDS blog, a link to a complete
movie:” ‘Debtocracy’ seeks the causes of the debt crisis across Europe
and proposes solutions, hidden by the government and the dominant media.
Unlike other entries to the nascent credit-crunch movie genre, the
film-makers do not go looking for guilty men and women. No ‘Inside Job,’
this. Instead what you get is a polemic against the European system; an
explanation of how Greece was always doomed to struggle against the
likes of Germany.
[Debtocracy](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qKpxPo-lInk) makes a
compelling case that the entire euro system was rotten from the start,
with bankers in Frankfurt and Paris left with piles of surplus cash, and
southern Europeans getting by on cheap loans.”

From Portside via Kurt Stand: Merkel won in Germany, but will she have
to coalition with the rival SPD to govern?
<http://portside.org/2013-09-23/germany-votes-wins-and-losses>

Some of our local members and readers are nearly as old as *Dissent*’s
Michael Walzer. So his account of a life dealing philosophically and (by
his own account) incompletely with feminism as it has evolved throughout
his own lifetime has value, perhaps, for both our grizzled deacons and
those with more immediate and contemporary experiences of the
inequalities. “The oppression of women is different from all other
oppressions,” says Walzer. Yet he believes it must be analyzed
“spherically” despite his flat statement…
<http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/feminism-and-me>

Sam Pizzigati’s excellent blog “Too Much,” locally grown (at IPS) and
full of both hope (teen essay contestants finger inequality as *the*
national malady) and disgust (“Petulant Plutocrat of the Week”).

**A flurry of articles about the Sept. 9-13 AFL-CIO convention and the
proposals to more closely join up with non-labor organizations:**

An *In These Times* piece by the venerable David Moberg on the AFL-CIO
convention and prospective makeover
<http://inthesetimes.com/article/15600/a_makeover_for_the_labor_movement/>

DSAer Mike Hirsch’s day by day blog from the convention, plus a Sept. 27
wrapup piece: <http://www.indypendent.org/authors/michael-hirsch>

Mike Hall from DSA’s Talking Union…
<http://talkingunion.wordpress.com/2013/09/13/delegates-commit-afl-cio-to-grow-labor-movement-through-diversity-inclusion/>

From Kurt Stand… a *Portside* take on the convention doings by Steve
Early:
<http://portside.org/2013-09-16/house-labor-needs-repairs-not-just-new-roommates>

[*Sequester Plus Shutdown and Default Threats – A Triple Threat for
Public
Service*](http://dsadc.org/sequester-plus-shutdown-and-default-threats-a-triple-threat-for-public-service/)

Monday, September 30th, 2013

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2013**

*By Bill Mosley*

As the *Washington Socialist* went to press, the federal government was
threatened with a partial shutdown on October 1, the end of the federal
fiscal year – a threat that has become all too routine in
partisan-gridlocked Washington of late.

Combine this with the ongoing, across-the-board federal budget cuts
known as the “sequester” and the possible default on the federal debt by
mid-October unless Congress acts to raise the debt ceiling, and the
public perception of government has never been lower. And that is
exactly how conservatives want it.

The standoff is less between differing Republican vs. Democratic
philosophies of governance than between those who want government to
work vs. those – nearly all right-wing Republicans – who want it to
fail. After the GOP was unsuccessful in its attempt to unseat Obama and
recapture the Senate in 2012, the Tea Party Republicans who have come to
dictate the party’s direction in the House of Representatives have
determined to use their leverage to tear the government apart, brick by
brick if necessary. They perceive the GOP’s gain of a handful of House
seats in the last election as a mandate – notwithstanding that voters
nationwide actually supported Democrats for the House by a margin of 1.4
million votes; the Republicans’ small gain was strictly due to districts
that were gerrymandered by GOP-controlled state legislatures.

Simply put, many Republicans don’t want government to work, or at least
work for most people. The more “responsible” Republicans – realists like
House Speaker John Boehner or New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie – do want
government to work, if mostly for the wealthy and large corporations,
and they have no problem with government when it comes to military
spending and the rest of the national-security apparatus. They also have
been willing to cut deals with Democrats, understanding that politics
is, as the saying goes, the art of the possible.

On the other hand, the far-right fringe is determined to undercut the
very notion of government in order to achieve its long-term objective of
savaging social spending and cutting taxes for the wealthy. Its initial
target is Obamacare, and has made defunding of the Obama
administration’s signature domestic achievement the price for both
keeping the government running after October 1 and extending the debt
ceiling. As flawed as Obamacare is, its passage served as a statement
that the government should be responsible for ensuring that Americans
have access to health care (although the program fell well short of true
universal coverage).

Likewise, the sequester gutted a wide range of government programs, from
Head Start to food programs for the poor, from unemployment benefits to
mass transit. The strategy is clear: The far right wants to destroy any
idea that government can or will help Americans of modest means. They
hope this will cause millions of likely Democratic voters to become
alienated from politics and stop voting. Better still, the right might
convince more working-class white voters – the “Reagan Democrats” of the
1980s – to support the conservatives’ homophobic, sexist, racist and
religiously intolerant social agenda. As Thomas Frank pointed out in
*What’s the Matter with Kansas*, once these voters become convinced the
government won’t or can’t help them with their economic troubles, they
base their allegiance on social issues – which favors the Republicans.

However, a shutdown can be risky politics. The last time Republicans
engineered a politically motivated government shutdown was 1995, under
then-House Speaker Newt Gingrich. The scheme failed to help Republicans
at the polls, with Bill Clinton convincingly winning re-election the
following year and the congressional elections resulting in no net gains
for either side.

What can Socialists do about this? Except as a part of broader
coalitions, we’re not going to affect what Congress does over the next
month. We can and should continue to educate the public about the need
for a vigorous public sector and the potential for the government –
combined with an engaged, expanded electorate – to not only provide a
safety net for the least fortunate, but to be an active instrument in
reducing inequality, generating opportunity, and fulfilling the
Declaration of Independence’s promise of “life, liberty and the pursuit
of happiness.”

[*Short takes: Navy Yard, Fossil Fuel Wars, Snowden
Affair*](http://dsadc.org/short-takes-navy-yard-fossil-fuel-wars-snowden-affair/)

Monday, September 30th, 2013

**The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt; October 2013**

*A NOTE ON THE NAVY YARD SHOOTINGS*

Less than a year after Newtown, yet another mass killing fills the
headlines – this one in our own backyard. But unlike Newtown, there is
hardly even a pretense among elected officials that they intend to do
anything to prevent future massacres. The gun lobby is too powerful –
not only the National Rifle Association but also the gun manufacturers
who drown with cash any meaningful effort at reform.

Already, opponents of gun control arguing that controlling assault
weapons – the lethal force used at Newtown – would have been useless in
this case, since the Navy Yard killer’s principal weapon was a shotgun.
But this bolsters the argument that banning specific weapons is only
part of the solution to gun violence. As [*DSA’s Bill
Boteler*](http://dsadc.org/prospects-for-reducing-mass-killings/) wrote
following the Newtown shootings, greater access to mental health care is
an important part of preventing future tragedies. Closing the gun-show
loophole is another part of the puzzle. But needed most of all is a
turning away from the coarser side of American culture that celebrates
violence and fetishizes individualism. As socialists, one of our goals
should be creating a culture of community, one that brings people
together in mutual support rather than driving them apart into lonely
and possibly destructive isolation.

**— Bill Mosley**

 

*A REVIEW OF A REVIEW: FOSSIL FUEL WARS*

For a green/socialist overview of recent climate change news and climate
change activism, DSA members may be interested in “The Fossil Fuels
War,” a survey of developments in the fossil fuel arena by socialist
environmentalist John Bellamy Foster. In the September 2013 *Monthly
Review*, Foster notes that mainstream energy analysts as recently as
2010 were worrying about “peak oil” and a looming crisis of declining
production in the fossil fuel industry – a development that seemed to
threaten capitalism with future energy shortages, but one that also
promised to accelerate a global transition from fossil fuel use to more
sustainable energy sources.

In a remarkably short time, though, fears about “peak oil” have been
eclipsed by the rapid progress of technological developments
facilitating the exploitation of “unconventional” fossil fuel sources,
which together promise to extend the carbon fuel era long beyond the era
of expected shortages once predicted by peak oil theorists. The new
unconventional fossil fuels include Canadian tar sands from Alberta,
liquid petroleum and natural gas reserves located deep beneath the ocean
floor – the search for which occasioned the Deepwater Horizon oil well
disaster in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 – and deep reserves of shale gas
and “tight oil” that are currently being extracted through fracking in
many parts of the United States.

The discovery of unconventional fossil fuels and capitalism’s
development of new technologies for tapping them are “unexpectedly
catapulting the United States once again into the position of a major
fossil fuel power,” Foster notes in “The Fossil Fuels War.”
Unfortunately, the same trends have “catastrophic” implications for the
climate.

Climate change researchers and activists including Bill McKibben of the
organization 350.org warn that the vast majority of unconventional
fossil fuels need to remain in the ground to prevent continuing climate
change that could soon prove “irreversible.” Given continued CO2
emissions and the changes in temperature expected from them, the
activists warm, the continued melting of summer sea ice in the Arctic,
by increasing the amount of solar energy absorbed by the oceans, and the
continued melting of permafrost regions in Canada and Siberia, by
releasing large volumes of the potent greenhouse gas methane into the
air, may together push the climate past a “tipping point” where future
human efforts to reverse or slow the process will become futile.

McKibben and many of the world’s leading climate scientists contend that
the long-term atmospheric concentration of CO2 needs to be less than 350
parts per million (ppm) for the tipping point to be avoided. At present,
though, the average CO2 concentration is roughly 392 ppm. And in the
view of McKibben and many other observers, the continuing development of
unconventional petroleum, natural gas and shale oil reserves that
capitalist governments and corporations are hoping to profit from would
make it impossible to bring CO2 concentrations down rapidly enough to
prevent a “runaway” greenhouse effect with dire consequences for
civilization.

The fight to block the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline to make dirty,
CO2-intensive tar sands oil from Alberta more available to world markets
is one key activist campaign that Foster mentions in his *Monthly
Review* survey of this issue. Others that 350.org is promoting include
organizing to push local governments , large universities and even banks
to divest themselves from stock ownership in fossil fuel producers. But
as a somewhat unconventional socialist, Foster argues that such “supply
side” activist campaigns – although important – will not be enough.

Instead, he cites respected experts with the British Royal Academy and
the Tyndall Institute for Climate Research to the effect that “demand
side” efforts at energy conservation also are required – measures that
probably are incompatible with the continued existence of growth-based
capitalism. Foster also expresses a long-term concern of many leftwing
climate activists about the need for western societies to address the
climate issue through a fundamental change in social relations — not
merely through rapid development of solar and wind power technologies at
the urging of a technocratic green elite.

For more details, see Foster’s [*somewhat lengthy
review*](http://monthlyreview.org/2013/09/01/fossil-fuels-war) in the
September 2013 *Monthly Review.*

**— Andy Feeney**

SNOWDEN & US

When Edward Snowden’s revelations were published, many of us thought the
kinds of government surveillance they uncovered had been known a decade
ago (as described in Wired). At that time we thought that al-Qaeda was a
real danger and if a lack of privacy helped keep us safe so much the
better. Besides, what was there to hide?

 However, the political environment changed with the ending of the war
in Iraq, the killing of Osama bin Laden, the Arab spring, and the
winding down of the war in Afghanistan. Yet the U.S. government programs
did not change, nor did Congress see that the new situation required a
change in the public social contract. The government prosecuted its
efforts with the same vigor it prosecuted World War II and the Cold War.
Although this vigor is celebrated with the likes of Seal Team 6, it
seemed dubious with whistleblowers like PFC Manning and Edward Snowden.
Promising not to execute Snowden if he returns to the U.S. does not
suggest an understanding of his needed contribution.

 Snowden’s and Congress’s new disclosures have changed the game. The
National Security Agency has most likely spent tens of billions of
dollars creating a world-class data warehouse to find only 54 instances
where this data helped detect terrorist attempts. Of these attempts,
only 13 were in the U.S. and only one was a “critical” assist. To spend
so many billions to block one terrorist attempt is a waste, or at least
blindness to alternative strategies. So what is going on? This question
has been what Edward Snowden is all about. His actions have initiated a
policy review that is very necessary and one the executive and
legislative branches have failed to provide to the American people. To
treat such a person as a spy only points out that the system is badly
broken and lacks imagination to see alternative techniques and an
understanding of our constitutional rights.

 Also unnerving is that the FISA cyber court reviewing the NSA’s
information requests was appointed by our Chief Justice, whose major
contribution has been changing our political contract from one person,
one vote to one where corporations are voters and the rich and
corporations run the show. The US’s political and economic system is
badly corrupted by undue monetary influence. Do we want to grant this
corruption access to all our personal information?

 Edward Snowden has started a badly needed policy review which Congress
is joining and releasing new information. Let us make sure the
investigation of domestic spying is complete so we understand our
options.

 

**— Daniel Adkins**

[*Virginia State Elections for 2013: Extremely Modest
Hopes*](http://dsadc.org/virginia-state-elections-for-2013-extremely-modest-hopes/)

Monday, September 30th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2013**

** ***By Daniel Adkins*

Virginia conservatives have bolstered their influence by having state
elections in years where there are no federal elections.  The 2011
off-year election vote was only 36 percent of the 2012 national election
turnout.  Conservatives are more likely to vote in those years than
others, possibly because urban and suburban areas have more mobility and
voter turnover.

Also, Republican gerrymandering has made Virginia elections more
challenging to Democrats.  Republicans benefit by Democrats’ being
concentrated in cities, but gerrymandering in the House of Delegates
aided Republicans, helping them achieve a 65-32 supermajority.

In the House of Delegates, Republicans do not even tell the Democrats
where their committee meetings are.  One northern Virginian delegate
told another, more southern delegate that his school district had
students speaking a hundred different languages.  The more southern
delegate responded, “How could that be, there are only 20 languages in
the world.”  The diversity that northern Virginians take for granted
does not impact many parts of the state.

The Virginia Senate is currently divided 20 – 20, but the lieutenant
governor breaks the tie, giving the Republicans the edge.  The Tea Party
takeover of the Virginia Republican Party was aided by having a
convention instead of a primary.  The Democrats’ long-term hope would be
for the exurbs to go Democratic by 2020 when the next redistricting
occurs.  Turning Virginia blue is a slow process.

Recently, Republicans have passed laws dismantling many abortion clinics
and achieving other Tea Party goals.  However, Bob McDonnell, the
current Republican governor, did sign a transportation bill important to
Northern Virginia.

The Republican candidate for governor is current Lt. Gov. Ken
Cuccinelli, who is famous for opposing Obamacare, investigating Virginia
university climate scientists, limiting women’s health options,
proposing to limit divorce options, and being a Tea Party favorite.

The democratic candidate for governor is Terry McAuliffe, who has been a
big fundraiser for the Democratic Party as well the party’s national
chair.  A claim to fame is wrestling an alligator to secure a \$15,000
campaign contribution.  He is also a businessman who tried to locate an
electric car factory in Mississippi, I guess for the educational
excellence.

The Democrats’ candidate for lieutenant governor is Ralph Northam, who
is the only MD in the Virginia Senate.  He is famous for pointing out
the Republican’s bill to monitor women’s reproductive health by
trans-vaginal probes.  Unfavorable publicity cut short parts of the
bill.  Dr. Northam is opposed by one of the most extreme of right-wing
politicians, E.W. Jackson, who has said, “Liberalism and their ideas 
\[abortion\] have done more to kill black folks who they claim so much
to love, than the Ku Klux Klan and lynching and slavery and Jim Crow
ever did, now that’s a fact.”

The Democratic candidate for attorney general, Mark Herring, is running
on supporting Virginia tech industries, the expansion of Medicaid, civil
rights, safety, and the right of women to make their own health
decisions.  Mark Obenshain, who favors ideology over the common
interest, opposes Herring.  Obenshain has proposed granting legal rights
at conception, mandating photo identification to cast a ballot, and
gerrymandering Senate district boundaries in an off year.

Voting for Virginia Democrats will not aid democracy by getting the
money out of our electoral politics or making our economy safe from
banks too big to fail.  However, it will help make Virginia safer for
diversity and everyone’s health.  A Democratic Virginia could lessen
crushing poverty and give efforts mitigating climate change a voice. 
Potentially, a Democratic Virginia could give the 99 percent a better
base to fight back.
