***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the February 2013 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the February Washington Socialist: A guide and links to
this month’s
offerings*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-february-washington-socialist-a-guide-and-links-to-this-months-offerings/)

Friday, February 1st, 2013

**Welcome to the February issue of The Washington Socialist.** If you
didn’t get this by email, you can — every month. Email
dsadcxchange@gmail.com. Select individual articles below from the
abstracts, or scroll down and find the full articles.

**Since Bill Murray’s star turn**, Groundhog Day has been synonymous
with doing the same thing over and over again and wondering why it
always turns out the same way.\
Several DSA writers tackled that theme as applied to our organization’s
decades-long struggle to emerge from the classic white-male dominance
that has plagued many organizations, not all of them left. But left
organizations have diversity in their declared DNA, so our failure in
the broad left is particularly galling. How can DSA express its
diversity DNA better? See below.

**Beyond Groundhog Day:** *Bill Mosley*, a DSA member since the 1980s,
reviews the national and local efforts to broaden the organization’s
membership and reach. Could the success of the one leftist organization
that had success in recruiting minority members – the Communist Party of
the 1930s and ‘40s – be duplicated in a more “open, democratic” and less
top-down organization like DSA? Mosley points out that our lack of
minority members masks a parallel non-diversity of class, of working
families in a DSA of mostly college-educated members, comparatively few
of whom are raising or schooling children. Could that be the problem we
should address in order to tackle our diversity problem? How much of the
roadblock is our own organizational culture and social practices? [*Read
complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f6633b4286&e=003de9ccab)

**Opening Political Spaces:** Mosley noted that approximately
three-fourths of the delegates to last year’s DSA convention were men
despite years of agonizing. Metro DC-DSA steering committee member
*Carolyn Byerly* explores that other “groundhog day” in greater depth,
and details the way that DSA’s organizational culture during her decades
of membership has remained, in many ways, unwelcoming to women and male
in style and process. The good news, if that’s what to call it, is that
DSA is not alone on the left in this. The bad news is that we exist in a
wide left culture and absorb our social practices from our surroundings.
And the “head space” that excludes not only women but feminist
perspectives is also deeply entrenched in the academic and intellectual
spheres from which we draw much of our ongoing, evolving analysis. We
have, Byerly says, much work to do. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=3efb30d8d2&e=003de9ccab)

**Shift Change:** “Alienated labor” is still a factor in our DSA
practice, but it’s often eroding workers’ power, even union workers,
more than ever these days. Worker-owned cooperatives are mounting a
challenge to this condition, and making a stand in a variety of
locations in and out of the US.  DC-DSA Co-chair *Jose Gutierrez*
relates how these examples are growing, portrayed in a recent film,
“Shift Change.” A recent showing at the AFL-CIO headquarters in D.C.
included a panel of commentators. Leo Gerard of the United Steel Workers
noted that in cooperatives, workers do not feel threatened by higher
productivity because it doesn’t get raked off by management. They are
management. Gar Alperovitz, a political scientist at the University of
Maryland and author of *America Beyond Capitalism* said “This is not a
new type of capitalism or socialism, it’s something new.” [*Read
complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=d7cc4f2411&e=003de9ccab)

**Statehood Plus:** The government of Washington, D.C. has been chafing
under the thumb of Congress for many years. This year, and with a new
Congress, the District government is pushing back with a ballot measure
that would end Congress’ control over D.C. budgeting. As *Bill Mosley*
recounts, the measure, on the special election ballot April 23, removes
the DC government budget from the congressional appropriations process.
Observers say it marks a change from a conciliatory approach toward
Congress to a more confrontational one. Advocates of full statehood
worry that the measure is a distraction, but its proponents say it dares
Congress to vote against democracy. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=e99d075a3f&e=003de9ccab)

**Maryland Legislative Session:** Deep blue Maryland has just entered
its annual legislative session with a better financial picture than
previous years and the progressive momentum from significant
ballot-measure victories on the state Dream Act and marriage equality.
Progressives, *Woody Woodruff* writes, have high hopes for offshore
wind, death penalty repeal, a state minimum wage increase and other top
items on wish lists of several years’ standing. With some vivid
personalities, including the Senate president, suddenly making nice
toward progressive goals, hopes are high. But the legislative session’s
tangled web has hog-tied many hopes before. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=3d806deb7c&e=003de9ccab)

**And a word to our readers about becoming our writers and our
advocates: **

**Socialist Scope –** Readers of The Washington Socialist are of course
encouraged to forward their email copies to friends who might be
interested – and you don’t have to be a DSA member to receive the
newsletter every month. Individual article addresses from their
permanent website home here can be cut-and-pasted into a friend’s email
if you see a specific article with appeal. The Metro DC DSA local
welcomes the interested or the just plain curious to our website, our
Meetup site (for the latest events notifications) and our Facebook page.

It is an article of faith with us, and perhaps with you, dear reader,
that most people are socialists. Whatever barriers the S-word might
represent for them, the long litany of today’s essentials that started
out life as socialist initiatives – and, of course, politically
impossible – becomes a persuasive one: social security, medicare, public
goods of all sorts, nationally and locally. Socialist mayors installed
sanitary sewer systems – what a ridiculous idea – in the first part of
the 20^th^ century and suddenly well-run cities became healthy, and
imported more enthusiastic migrants than they exported disease-felled
corpses. Imitators, even non-socialist politicians, rushed to follow.

Few of us were born with the word “socialist” in our mouths. We came to
know it as a useful — even stirring — term for the social justice goals
and practices we came to love and pursue separately.

So we hope that you, our readers, will

-   spread this newsletter as widely as possible, reminding friends and
    contacts that they can sign up to get it themselves.

-   get mad, or amused, or enthralled at an article in the newsletter
    and write a piece to amplify, contradict or improve the informed
    opinions (always, of course, buttressed by facts) that you
    read here.

**Be a participant.**

[*A DSAers Plan to share MLK’s Vision: Humanity, Not
Warships*](http://dsadc.org/a-dsaers-plan-to-share-mlks-vision-humanity-not-warships/)

Thursday, January 31st, 2013

DC DSA Blog post by Nick Lyell

Many of us have protested, often loudly.  We fight for equality,
justice, and sanity.  But speaking volumes louder than any megaphone is
the influence of the powerful and the wealthy on our politicians. Our
voices have increasingly been drowned out by these inequalities in
influence.

We are faced with a seemingly insurmountable situation.  Politicians
have little incentive to challenge their source of campaign cash, the
news media is faced with similar incentives, and regular citizens can’t
afford to produce or run advertisements.

Favorably, as events from Tahrir Square to the re-election of Barack
Obama have shown, the Internet can be a powerful tool to leverage
grassroots advantages in the face of concentrated wealth and power.

Still, Americans get the vast majority of their entertainment from
television.  Many get almost all of their political knowledge from ads
and news on TV.  The trick then, is to turn these online advantages into
on-screen messages.

[*Loud Sauce*](https://loudsauce.com/) is an innovative startup company
which provides a platform for
[*crowd-funded*](http://blogs.aljazeera.com/blog/americas/crowdfunding-future-marketing)
issue-ads, an incredible development which would have only been
pipe-dreams a couple years ago.  From the web-based platform,
individuals can see the ad for free, share easily with their friends
across social media, and pledge to the campaign.

Importantly, the pledge is not equivalent to a donation.  Like
[*Kickstarter*](http://www.kickstarter.com/), another crowd-funding
platform, those pledges will only be drawn upon in the event that the
project meets its fundraising goal, so no one throws money at a project
that will never happen.  None of the risk and all of the reward.

It is with all this in mind that a friend and I created a political
issue ad.  Think of it as an experiment in Democracy.  The logic of
collective action, in a world of declining unionism, applied to
advertising.  Can two regular American citizens, with the support of
hundreds of others, get the same kind of influence as a corporation,
billionaire, or bank who can afford to run advertisements?

Incredibly, this may be a first.  This may be a proof-of-concept for the
idea of grassroots-funded political ads, a game-changer. In this
democratic effort,  the process is the experiment and the message
important and timely.

The fiscal cliff is looming, and our critical social safety-net programs
are being threatened in negotiations by both Republicans and Democrats. 
In a scramble to balance the budget, Congress is likely to leave those
without the money and influence to hire lobbyists behind.  This means
the underrepresented: minority, poor, and working-class Americans who
are already experiencing the brunt of The Great Recession will be
stripped of the meager social support that the state currently offers
them.

As Americans we all share an interest in our common values: being our
brother’s keeper, expressing our political voice, sharing our scarce
resources without waste, and humanity in the most general sense.  Our
budget is way out of whack with these values.  We currently waste
trillions on useless and ineffective weapon contracts like the J-35
fighter and this spending comes at a cost, not just over \$500 million
per jet, but over 2.2 million that could have been fed, or over 652,000
that could have been housed for a year.  This is the message we hope to
inspire with – that humanity needs to be a budget priority.

As Democratic Socialists we know that we win and lose not as individuals
but as a society and as a nation, that we are always judged by the least
well-off among us.  For moral and spiritual reasons, Dr. King stressed
the need to alter our course.  For moral and practical reasons,
President (and former-General) Eisenhower stressed the need to restrain
wasteful military spending.

For all of these reasons and more, we must make sure that the 99% has
their voice heard in the budget negotiations.  It’s time to change the
national political conversation around our budget priorities: Humanity,
not warships.  This grassroots advertising experiment is one giant leap
for the cause.

*Be a part of this grassroots democracy experiment! * [**Donate \$5,
\$10, or whatever you can and share with your friends.  If only 150
people donate \$20 each, we could put this ad up on TV in a competitive,
high-visibility
spot.**](https://loudsauce.com/campaigns/537-donate-to-get-this-on-tv-mlk-s-vision-humanity-not-warships)

[*Beyond “Groundhog Day” — DSA and Persons of
Color*](http://dsadc.org/beyond-groundhog-day-dsa-and-persons-of-color/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2013**

*By Bill Mosley*

In the 1993 film “Groundhog Day,” an arrogant newscaster played by Bill
Murray is condemned through some magical intervention to live out the
same day (February 2, of course) over and over again.  The character has
to try to find some way to break out of the loop and reach February 3,
but over seemingly hundreds of successive Groundhog Days his efforts
fail – until the happy ending, of course.

Activism sometime seems like “Groundhog Day,” with the same questions
and issues arising time after time which, after much debate and many
proffered solutions, nothing changes.  And no issue Democratic
Socialists of America has faced more resembles a repetitive loop than
the old question:  Why are there so few persons of color in DSA?

DSA hasn’t conducted any recent polls or surveys on members’ race or
ethnicity.  However, to attend nearly any DSA meeting or convention,
local or national, over the organization’s lifetime (back to the
founding in 1982, and earlier than that in the predecessor
organizations) would bear out the fact that DSA is, and has been, a
nearly all-white organization (“white” being a notoriously slippery
term, but that’s a topic for another day).  And for nearly as long, DSA
has regularly engaged in self-flagellation over this fact.  How, we ask,
can we call ourselves a progressive organization, working for the
benefit of the entire working class, while we have so few
African-American, Latino and other minority members – the very people
who would benefit most from the policies we champion?

First, I should say that in recent years, DSA has largely moved beyond
its earlier hand-wringing and acknowledged the difficulty of organizing
across racial lines in this racially polarized society.  It is often
said that the only successful multiracial national organizations in the
United States are trade unions – and these consist of workers banding
together out of necessity.   When one looks at other organizations on
the left, DSA is about as diverse as most of them.

However, as recently as 1992, the DSA National Board (a now-defunct body
that met in the years between biennial national conventions), meeting in
D.C., adopted a resolution calling for 10 percent of the organization to
be composed of “traditionally underrepresented racial, ethnic and
linguistic minority groups” by 1994.  The resolution, however, was
accompanied by no specific strategy to achieve this ambitious goal.  I
was a delegate to the Board and confess to being swept up in a wave of
optimism and voting for the resolution, and then almost immediately
regretting my support for such an empty gesture.  (Someone – OK, it was
me – quipped that we could achieve this almost overnight by convincing
most of the white members to quit).  Needless to say, the resolution was
a spectacular failure.  Later during the 1990s, a proposal circulated
within DSA to achieve instant diversity by merging with the Black
Radical Congress, but the idea failed to gain traction.

Any attempt to achieve solidarity across racial lines swims against the
tide of more than four centuries of white oppression of persons of color
that have poisoned race relations in the United States — including two
and one-half centuries of black slavery followed by another century of
Jim Crow, as well as genocidal wars against Native Americans.  Persons
of color have understandably preferred to chart their own agenda rather
than leave their fate in the hands of majoritarian society, and to
nurture their own movements rather than consign themselves to being
minorities in majority-white organizations – whose members may be
well-meaning but lack an understanding of the real needs of minority
communities.  While some saw the election of Barack Obama as a sign that
we may be the cusp of a post-racial society, the rise of the Tea Party –
a movement rife with white racial resentment – indicates otherwise.  And
while the false charges from the far right that Obama was a closet
socialist helped raise awareness of and interest in socialism and DSA,
it didn’t result in a noticeable boost in minority recruitment.

Reaching out to and recruiting Latinos involves its own challenges, the
language barrier being only the most conspicuous.    The transnational
character and isolation of a large segment of the Latino population pose
obstacles to attempts by the U.S. left to build bridges, while the same
characteristics make Latinos inviting scapegoats for racists and
nativists.

Relations between persons of color and the U.S. socialist movement had a
troubled beginning.  During the early days of the U.S. Socialist Party,
its leader Eugene V. Debs spoke out against racial prejudice and refused
to appear before segregated audiences.  However, according to Debs
biographer Ray Ginger, he “refused to concede that poor Negroes were in
a worse position than poor white people” and believed that the
achievement of socialism would sweep away racial divisions.  Even this
was more enlightened than the views of other Socialist notables such as
Victor Berger, who wrote that “the negroes and mulattoes constitute a
lower race.”  African Americans of the early 20^th^ century, faced with
lynching, segregation and job discrimination, were understandably not
prepared to lay aside their own pressing concerns while waiting for the
socialist millennium to arrive.

However, one socialist organization enjoyed success for a time in
recruiting African Americans – the Communist Party USA.  Especially
during the period between the world wars, the CP made an aggressive
effort to reach out to African Americans and immerse itself in their
struggles.  According to Fraser M. Ottanelli’s history of the CP,
African Americans made up some 11 percent of the organization’s
membership in the mid-1930s.  The party’s notables included leading
African-American writers and intellectuals such as W.E.B DuBois, Richard
Wright and Ralph Ellison.  However, unlike DSA, the CP was a cadre
organization – the party’s leadership, taking its direction from Moscow,
could simply order its members to work on priority issues.  An open,
democratic organization such as DSA can’t do that.  Of course, the CP’s
collapse in the early 1990s ended that experiment in multi-racial
socialism.

If DSA had been founded as an explicitly multiracial organization, its
history may have been different.  We have to live with the legacy of
Michael Harrington’s founding of the DSA’s predecessor organization, the
Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee, which espoused solidarity
with the struggles of minorities but included few persons of color in
its leadership.  DSOC and DSA were thereafter tagged as “white”
organizations.  DSA has included a number of prominent minorities –
Cornel West, Dolores Huerta, Manning Marable – on its list of notable
members, but their presence has had scant effect on recruitment at the
grass roots.

But even with the best intentions, DSA’s organizational culture poses a
barrier to appealing to and recruiting minorities.  People tend to seek
out and stick with organizations where they feel comfortable and
welcome, and that usually means those whose members have similar
backgrounds and common experiences to share.  DSA’s culture, like it or
not, is one of highly educated, talkative white people who have
significant amounts of free time.  Rather than obsess over the lack of
African Americans and Latinos, we might take note of other groups
largely absent in our membership (many of these overlapping): 
blue-collar workers, low-wage service workers, people without college
degrees, the homeless and chronically unemployed, recent immigrants and
people not fluent in English, persons with disabilities and (at least
among active members) parents with young children.  Within these groups
are countless people who might be attracted to our politics but would
probably not be comfortable with, or not have enough free time for,
participating in our meetings and activities. In addition – and this is
an important topic for discussion in itself — women are woefully
underrepresented among DSA activists and leadership; for example,
approximately three-fourths of the delegates to last year’s DSA
convention were men.  Many women in DSA have cited the “maleness” of the
organization’s culture as a reason they’re not more active.

So where do we go from here?  I don’t have all the answers, nor does
anyone else.  But I can suggest a few places to start.  First, let’s
make sure we don’t fall back into our habits from the 1990s of setting
unrealistic diversity goals and then beating ourselves up when we don’t
achieve them.  Let’s build an organization we can be proud of, not one
to berate for not being perfect.

Nevertheless, we should continue looking for ways to engage communities
of color in a constructive and fraternal way – not because we want to
pirate their members or tell them what to do, but out of genuine
interest in their causes.  We should focus on issues that are of concern
to minority communities – poverty, immigration, criminal-justice reform,
health care, jobs – and seek out organizations rooted in minority
communities to work in partnership with them.  Minority activists have
learned to sniff out condescending and know-it-all whites from a mile
away – so to make this work we have to make it clear that we’re in it to
help, not give orders.  Unlike the CP, DSA can’t simply order its
members to drop everything and work on campaigns of the organization’s
choosing; we’ll need to get our members’ buy-in and interest and not ask
them to step too far out of their comfort zones, at least at first. 
Helping resolve gang disputes may be too daunting a project, but walking
a picket line with janitors is just our speed.  Our aim must be to show
that we’re serious and reliable partners with grassroots communities.  
We don’t want to be heavy-handed in pushing DSA’s line or collaring
people into joining the organization (which we generally don’t do
anyway) – but if DSA is seen as important and relevant enough to these
struggles, recruitment will be easier and more natural.

Transforming DSA into a broad, majoritarian, multi-racial organization
should be the aspiration of all of our members.  However, the road to
that goal may need to be traveled in small steps.  But if we start now,
we can put another Groundhog Day debate behind us and help bring about
DSA’s flowering as a more diverse organization.

[*Film, Panel on Worker Coops Gets
Buzz*](http://dsadc.org/film-panel-on-worker-coops-gets-buzz/)

Thursday, January 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2013**

*By Jose Gutierrez*

“Shift Change” was shown on December 17^th^  in the Gompers Room of the
AFL-CIO building in Washington DC. I found it to be an enormously
inspiring movie.

“Shift Change” shares the stories of the many employee-owned businesses\
that successfully compete in today’s economy. These companies are
special in that they provide secure, dignified jobs in democratic
workplaces. As a result of the current economic crisis, citizens and
public officials are ready to look for new solutions. Workers and
managers alike strive to reinvent our failing economy and to restore
employment in a more egalitarian way.

Before the movie was shown, a panel discussed the potential of
cooperatives.\
The members of the panel included Leo Gerard, from United Steelworkers
Union; David Madland, from the Center for American Progress; Liz Bailey,
from the Cooperative Development Foundation; Gar Alperovitz, from the
Democracy Collaborative, and John Cavanagh, from the Institute for
Policy Studies.

The first speaker was Leo Gerard. Gerard championed unions and coops as
natural partners. He cast the Mondragon company in the Basque province
of Spain as a useful model. He averred that all cooperatives train their
workers and pay them well.  In Canada, the union movement had tried to
increase employee ownership. However, they were harshly criticized by
many members of the Canadian left for working with the business bosses.
He added: “My father was a socialist. I’m a socialist. My father said
that it was important for workers to own the means of production.” In
the course of his presentation he stated: “No one would give us money.
We sold our shares and we lost control. This (the creation of American
cooperatives that are modeled after Mondragon) is the next step.”

In cooperatives workers do not feel threatened by higher productivity.
Gerard recommends that Steelworker coops through out this country be
closely modeled on the Mondragon coops. He stresses that we should not
rush this conversion and in this way cause it to fail.

David Madland of the Center for American Progress argued that Employee
Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) companies, profit sharing, and cooperatives
are all part of a type of “inclusive capitalism.”

Companies like these provide higher wages to their workers. They are all
about building a better type of capitalism. Organizations of this
variety have had a good track record in the US. There is potential for
bipartisan support for such efforts. Ronald Reagan called these types of
enterprises “people’s capitalism.”

Liz Bailey of the Cooperative Development Foundation informed the
audience that CDF members are raising funds for cooperatives in New
Orleans and New York City.  NOLA Coops helped displaced residents in the
wake of Hurricane Katrina. The CDF has also organized participants in
“welfare to work” programs into coops. She concurred that coop workers
get better training and are paid better, adding that they are on a
professional track. She also spoke briefly about how the Affordable Care
Act promotes home care and how this could be a great opportunity to
organize new workers into coops.

John Cavanagh of the Institute for Policy Studies stated that
cooperatives could be the cornerstone of a new economy.

Gar Alperovitz, Democracy Collaborative (and a professor at the
University of Maryland) said that there is a development process driven
by pain and failure leading to something new. Cooperatives are part of a
historical process that might lead to a new political movement. “This is
not a new type of capitalism or socialism, it’s something new.”

**Some projects featured in the film:**

*Mondragon Cooperative*: Begun in the 1950s, the Mondragon co-ops have
transformed a depressed area of Spain into one of the most productive in
Europe with a high standard of living and an egalitarian way of life.
These co-ops produce computer chips, high tech industrial machinery,
household appliances, and many other products. They are owned and
managed by their workers. Seeing the achievements of Mondragon helps to
overcome the idea—widespread in North America—that worker run
cooperatives can only exist on the economic fringe.

*The Evergreen Cooperatives* in Cleveland, Ohio: This is an ambitious
urban redevelopment model, directly inspired by Mondragon, where local
institutions and public officials are supporting green cooperatives of
previously marginalized, predominantly African American workers, who
provide commercial laundry services, install solar energy systems, and
grow vegetables in vast urban greenhouses.

*Arizmendi Association of Cooperatives*: Started 30 years ago, there are
now six of these independent worker owned and managed cooperative
bakeries in Northern California, concentrated around San Francisco, that
work together to provide the financial and legal services they need, and
to incubate new coop bakeries.

* Cooperatives of immigrant workers*: Often the most marginalized in our
current economic system, immigrant workers are starting cooperatives to
create secure, environmentally friendly jobs. The non-profit WAGES helps
low income women, largely Latina immigrants, organize green
house-cleaning cooperatives in the San Francisco Bay Area.

*Isthmus Engineering and Manufacturing* in Madison, Wisconsin: This
proudly worker owned and managed company designs and builds custom high
tech manufacturing equipment for the medical, automotive and energy
industries. They have a strong commitment to improving solar
technologies. They’ve joined with other longstanding coops in Madison,
including Union Cab and Community Pharmacy, plus many others, to form a
network of worker cooperatives that can support each other and encourage
new cooperative businesses to form.

Cooperatives are an example of democracy in the workplace that
democratic socialists can support but that can also appeal to moderates
and even conservatives.

**Further:** A website where you can purchase the movie:
[*http://www.bullfrogfilms.com/catalog/shift.html*](http://www.bullfrogfilms.com/catalog/shift.html)
;\
A Facebook page with visual info:
[*http://www.facebook.com/shiftchangemovie*](http://www.facebook.com/shiftchangemovie)

[*Jobs and environment top progressive agenda in Md.
Assembly*](http://dsadc.org/jobs-and-environment-top-progressive-agenda-in-maryland-assembly/)

***The Washington Socialist*&lt;&gt;February 2013**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Maryland’s economic prospects are looking up, somewhat, and at least for
now, the General Assembly session is looking sunnier too.

Gov. Martin O’Malley’s budget, submitted to the legislature a few days
after the Jan. 17 opening of the three-month session, seeks no major
cuts of the sort that made previous sessions so painful and adds some
sweeteners to programs favored by progressives.

Even the retrograde, tax-averse Senate President Mike Miller has turned
some kind of corner at age 70, promising that after two failed attempts,
a state-driven offshore wind project will get through the Senate, and
proposing an overlaid sales tax on gasoline to fund transportation
projects.

Progressive legislators and their organizational allies rate many other
critical projects favorably or at least with a fighting chance,
including a clean water and pesticide disclosure package, a fully
financed study of hydraulic fracturing, death penalty repeal and – more
a long shot – an increase in the state minimum wage.

But a lot can go wrong in three months, as progressives have found to
their dismay in the past. As with many legislatures, the Assembly has a
history of taking two or three tries to pass even the most attractive
and well-supported bills. And the legislators can’t increase the
governor’s budget, but they can make cuts and move money around among
the line items.

And best-laid plans may be ruffled by a new, large gun control
initiative by O’Malley driven by reaction to the massacre of elementary
school children and their teachers at Newtown, Conn.   The package of
new gun control regulations, including an assault weapons ban, is high
on the public agenda but also the kind of high-conflict issue that could
hog a lot of the oxygen at the session.

The [*National Association Education of
Maryland*](http://www.marylandeducators.org/detail.aspx?id=4594), which
represents the bulk of the state’s teachers, is gearing up to defend and
if possible augment a respectable budget level of “Thornton” funding for
schools, somewhat equalizing the disparity between high-income counties
like Montgomery and Howard counties and low-income systems like Prince
George’s County and Baltimore City.  Alvin Thornton, a Prince George’s
school board member and chair, led a state-appointed panel that in 1999
created a formula and framework for equalizing school resources around
the state.

Maryland is still emerging from tough times in the public sphere and
private business. Maryland unions, who according to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics lost 30,000 union jobs between 2011 and 2012, are working
separate paths during the session to hold or increase jobs, insiders
say. Construction unions in a welcome alliance with green forces
continue to back the offshore wind project, with its promise of 15,000
jobs over 20 years. The O’Malley budget offers minority small business
sweeteners in this latest offshore wind version that should keep
traditional allies together on the project, and proponents argue that
the state can become a hub of turbine technology research and
manufacture as well.

Additional transportation money, for roads and transit, may make
Miller’s notion of a sales tax on motor fuel attractive; the fight then
will be between new-road advocates and transit buffs. The bad taste left
by the Inter-County Connector, a hugely expensive and underutilized toll
road from Montgomery to Prince George’s, could tip sentiments toward
transit and the Purple Line. The ICC single-handedly maxed out
Maryland’s bond capacity and environmentalists see it as a stealth
segment of an Outer Beltway that would confirm the region as the
gridlock capital of the Western world.  The long-planned Purple Line
light rail from Silver Spring to New Carrollton, also a job-generator,
benefits from the shadow the ICC throws on big new road projects.

Miller’s plan for adding an overlay sales tax to gasoline sales wasn’t
to be released until around Feb. 1, though Lou Davis of the MPT program
“State Circle” joked Jan. 25 that “he’s been leaking it all week.” It
appears to have a regional structure, with counties permitted to apply
the tax for their transportation projects as well as a state cut.
Miller’s considerable clout will be tested; the other two major players,
O’Malley and House Speaker Michael Busch, appear to be keeping their
powder dry.

Environmentalists consider the [*offshore wind
bill*](http://www.marylandoffshorewind.org/) a top priority as well, but
feel more confident about its chances now that one of the principal
roadblocks, Sen. Anthony Muse of Prince George’s, has unceremoniously
been shifted out of the Senate Finance Committee to another spot. His
replacement, Prince George’s Sen. Victor Ramirez, is a committed friend
of the offshore wind bill, which failed to get out of the Finance
Committee last year on the hectic final day of the session. Again,
Miller – who took some heat for the Senate’s role in the fiasco –
swapped Muse for Ramirez unilaterally and guaranteed the offshore wind
bill would get to the floor this session.

The green forces also back a package that would require full reporting
of pesticide use by agriculture. The state [*League of Conservation
Voters*](http://www.mdlcv.org/issues) describes it as “a simple and
cost-neutral, centralized online pesticide reporting database paid for
by a modest fee increase for chemical manufacturers.”

Environmentalists also hope to pass a “bag bill” at either state or
county level. Bills allowing a five-cent county-level fee on plastic
bags – a huge source of litter – have been introduced covering both the
state and just Prince George’s County. The county bill would allow the
county council to pass the bag-fee legislation, something it can’t do
without a legislative OK. The state bill would enable all counties to do
the same. Prince George’s is flanked by jurisdictions – Montgomery
County and the District – where the bag fee is already in place with
demonstrably good results, visible to the public eye.

Maryland has a moratorium in place on [*hydraulic
fracturing*](http://maryland.sierraclub.org/action/p0319.asp), the
method of extracting natural gas from shale formations that has roiled
Pennsylvania and New York state. Impoverished Western Maryland lies over
a portion of the vast Marcellus Shale rimming the eastern piedmont and
homeowners want to sell drilling rights – but evidence is strong that
the method, which involves pumping toxic liquids into the deep shale,
threatens ground water supplies and aquifers as it has been practiced.

The moratorium will remain in place until a study required by a law
sponsored by Montgomery Del. Heather Mizeur is completed, and because
the study was never funded it was feared pressure from drillers and
property owners in the western counties would remove the constraint.

But Mizeur told activists at a Greenbelt Climate Action Network meeting
in mid-January that the governor’s budget, to be released the next day,
would contain full funding for a real analysis of the risks. That
funding, too, has to be defended during the session.

The state [*Green
Party*](http://www.marylandgreenparty.org/2012/12/weve-introduced-our-2013-legislative.html)
is backing offshore wind, death penalty repeal and an effort to restrict
corporate spending on elections in the state, reversing (at least for
Maryland) some of the worst effects of the Citizens United decision on
campaign financing by “Prohibiting business entities from making
contributions to a campaign finance entity to support or oppose a
candidate.”

Admirably, the Green Party is also backing the creation of a Maryland
state bank that would be the depository for all state tax and fee
revenue, on the model of the 91-year-old state bank of North Dakota.
Bills providing for that bank were filed last year, but failed.

The Green Party, perennially under the threat of losing its ballot line,
must generate 10,000 valid petition signatures in each election cycle;
they propose lowering that  to 5,000 because “third party candidates
\[are forced\] to spend most of their resources on ballot access instead
of campaigning.” Sen. Paul Pinsky, a progressive Democrat from Prince
George’s, has frequently filed similar ballot access bills but the
interest of the Democratic majority does not appear to align with such
notions.

And at the level of real poverty, legislators are proposing an increase
in the state’s minimum wage, which has been at the federal level of
\$7.25 an hour for years. Nineteen states and D.C. have higher minimum
wages than Maryland.

Del. Aisha Braveboy of Prince George’s and Sen. Rob Garagiola of
Montgomery have announced they will cross-file bills in their respective
chambers that  “would raise the minimum wage to \$8.25 in July, \$9 in
July 2014 and \$10 in July 2015…. The minimum wage for employees who
rely on tips also would rise, to 70 percent of the minimum wage from 50
percent,” according to an account in the *Gazette* newspapers.

Unions and progressive groups including Progressive Maryland have formed
[*“Raise
Maryland,”*](http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2013-01-22/news/bal-should-maryland-hike-minimum-wage-20130122_1_minimum-wage-employment-policies-institute-federal-rate)
a coalition to back the minimum wage bill; it held a demonstration in
mid-January in Annapolis.

Be Sociable, Share!

[*Opening Political Spaces: Some Personal
Reflections*](http://dsadc.org/opening-political-spaces-some-personal-reflections/)

Thursday, January 31st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2013**

*By Carolyn Byerly*

My DSA Comrade Bill Mosely’s piece “Beyond Groundhog Day” (in this same
issue) has helped me think (again) about the many women’s and leftist
organizations I’ve belonged to through the years that have taken up the
question “Why are we a white organization and how can we change it”?

The question is an honest one.  We want to be inclusive in our political
work at every level including membership.  But too often we do carry out
our good intentions within the realities of our white (and gendered)
identities . . . perhaps.

For me, moving outside my own white, female experience has started with
opening space in my head and shifting the ways I get politically
involved.  I’ve had some great teachers, and some awkward (even painful)
moments trying to do this.  Thus, I can share a few personal lessons
about “white” organizations.  These are essentially to:

1)  Embrace what many African American radicals have taught me through
the years:  “Work on racism in your own \[meaning my\] communities.”

2)  Stop trying to bring people of color into my organizations; instead,
join theirs with the intention of staying and working through their
leadership.  (p.s., This doesn’t mean to stop outreach or to be
welcoming in our own groups, just to diversify our own strategies.)

3)  Find ways to build coalitions across organizations either on an
issue basis, or an ongoing basis – this echoes Bill’s article in one
aspect, allowing white majority groups to work with civil rights and
other minority majority groups in common purpose.

4)  Read more black and Latino writers with a left political conscience,
both women and men.

5)  Spend more social time in the company of people from other races and
ethnicities.  Develop greater ease with their cultures and explore
friendships where possible.

Bill’s article also mentioned the often-touted accusation that DSA lacks
female members, citing its male culture.  This is something that
resonates with my own experience, not only in DSA but other left
organizations and, frankly, in general in this society.  Good men do not
mean to be exclusionary or sexist – they seem to become both because
they “live” in a male-centered head space.  Everything around us affirms
and reinforces this.

Less discussed these days is how leftist men participate.

For example, I am regularly struck by some of my favorite white leftist
intellectuals who assume that their analysis of social institutions
“works” for women (and also people of color) the same way it does for
men.  One example is related to communication policies, something I’ve
studied and worked to change for a number of years.  The male scholars
and political analysts who write most of the books on concentration of
ownership and the public policies that enable it fail to acknowledge the
impact of conglomeration on women and racial minorities.  They espouse a
“one analysis fits all” philosophy.

One reason this happens is because even smart, left-leaning men I know
don’t read books or articles by women.  My own feminist scholarship is
rarely cited by my male academic colleagues, even though we meet up at
conferences and talk about the same concerns.  It just doesn’t occur to
them that I (or other feminist media scholars) have anything to offer
them.  When a Canadian Marxist colleague contacted me about five years
ago to ask me to suggest some of my articles on media ownership and
women’s employment, I was pleasantly surprised.  He has started citing
my (and other feminists’) work now, which brings gender into his own
research in ways it was previously missing.

These are breakthroughs that matter.

But let me add an illustration of how women also become marginalized
across racial lines.  In the course of drafting this short commentary, I
received an email announcing the “African American Economic Summit” to
focus on needed policies in Obama’s second term.  The event, to be held
February 1 and sponsored by the Joint Center for Political and Economic
Studies, is to be hosted by my own campus, Howard University.  The
announcement lists about 10 “distinguished scholars and policy experts”
from Duke, Howard, and a range of think tanks, only one of whom is a
woman.  I have contacted the event’s sponsor and organizers and learned
that some half dozen women are scheduled to be on various panels at the
Summit, but they are all but invisible in the advance publicity. Did the
male speakers have more perceived value for attracting attendees in the
organizers’ minds?

These slights aside, we are wise to see that this is a historical moment
with an opportunity to mobilize a new-New Left, and I believe that this
can only happen if women and people of color are all involved.

I have chosen to do make a portion of my contribution to expanding and
building DSA, but it’s not the only venue where I exercise my activist
spirit.  Wherever we choose to work, I think we need to keep talking
openly about race and gender, doing what one of my favorite writers,
Paul Gilroy, calls “saying some things that are messy and disagreeable”
in the process.

[*The Local Gets Busy: Looking Back on
2012*](http://dsadc.org/the-local-gets-busy-looking-back-on-2012/)

Wednesday, January 16th, 2013

At the risk of sounding like every other ‘we did a lot give us money and
volunteer’ email I got at the end of the year; I’m happy to report that
the DC DSA local really did accomplish a lot in 2012. I am proud of what
we did and, after some badgering from more then a few of you, I have
finally sat down to write about what we did (and didn’t) get done last
year.

In January 2012, if you had told me that in one year the DSA DC local
would have a monthly
[*newsletter*](http://us5.campaign-archive2.com/?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=0411ea9bd3), a
[*website*](http://dsadc.org/) that works,  two new committees, a
reformed steering committee *and* a megaphone… I might have raised an
eyebrow.

If you then went on to tell me that we would increase the DC DSA
presence in many local progressive campaigns like [*Occupy
DC*](http://occupydc.org/about/background), [*Dignity at
Darden*](http://www.dignityatdarden.org/), [*Our
Walmart*](http://forrespect.org/), and [*Stop the
TPP*](https://www.eff.org/issues/tpp) and several others; I would
probably have laughed.

If you continued onward – despite my social cues indicating not to – and
said that we would also coordinate and run a big [*GET UP
training*](http://files.meetup.com/1580690/Get%20Up%20Brochure%20Petitioning_2012.07.11.pdf),
a training explaining the causes and solutions to the economic crisis
 for progressive activists;

and that we would go on to observe the [*50th Anniversary of the Other
America*](http://guevents.georgetown.edu/event/50_years_after_michael_harringtons_the_other_america_where_is_the_war_on_poverty) with
a movie showing and expert panel, as well as campaign for Democrats we
had mixed feelings about, I would have told you to lay off the paint
thinner.

But the truth is we really did do all of that, and more. So yes, the
truth is stranger than fiction.

But as socialists we know that there is always opportunity for progress.
Among the projects we hope to undertake in 2013 are further improvements
to the website (including an events calendar), attracting more diversity
in our membership, and working to improve transparency and communication
from the steering committee. Not all of these issues have an easy fix,
but at the risk of sounding like a paint thinner abusing nut who needs
to take it down a notch; I think that the DC DSA local can do all that –
and more – in 2013.

I think that we can do more training,  more actions, more reading, and
more writing then we did in 2012.

We already have events planned for this weekend including participation
in the MLK Peacewalk and leafleting at Inauguration Day. With you help,
we can make 2013 even more successful then 2012.

[*Join us*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/) as we make 2013 even better
then 2012!
