***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from Midsummer 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*DC Metro DSA’s Midsummer Newsletter: Nuts and Bolts for Backing a
Socialist
Candidate*](http://dsadc.org/dc-metro-dsas-midsummer-newsletter-nuts-and-bolts-for-backing-a-socialist-candidate/)

Wednesday, July 15th, 2015

 

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the midsummer edition of the *Washington Socialist***, the
monthly email newsletter of the Metro DC Democratic Socialists of
America.

As has become traditional (for at least two years!) our midsummer issue,
covering July and August, is published on Bastille Day. Though
[*historians have
tagged*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/5-myths-about-the-french-revolution/2015/07/09/6f27c6f0-25af-11e5-b72c-2b7d516e1e0e_story.html)
many of the myths that Bastille Day embodies as just that – myths – it
is still a day honoring a singular event in modern history. In fact, by
the account of many historians, modernity began in 1789. The enthusiasts
who seized power in Europe’s largest nation intuited a need for broad,
consultative re-definition of the terms of life, exchange and work if
this new thing were to be more than just another transfer of power from
the old powerful to the new powerful.

The level of industrialization and alienation of labor that would
animate Marx, Engels and the First International were decades in the
future and already more advanced across the Channel, but the French
people’s response to the need for change in 1789 was a singularity,
premature or not.

**BELLWETHER**: Sometimes the “threat of a good example” (Chomsky) can
bring progress instead of pushback. A statewide bill for paid sick leave
in Maryland has foundered in the General Assembly for three straight
years. But the actions of Montgomery County’s council June 23 in
[*passing a strong county
measure*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/md-politics/montgomery-county-joins-other-localities-providing-paid-sick-leave/2015/06/23/6af506d0-19e1-11e5-ab92-c75ae6ab94b5_story.html)
on paid sick leave might push the legislators to bring the state bill
out of the death panels – er, committees – in next spring’s session.
Recognizing how Montgomery can be a bellwether for the state, a robust
coalition of county and state organizations and unions led by the
Baltimore-based [*Jobs Opportunity Task Force/Working
Matters*](http://www.jotf.org/) coalition worked the issue hard and
coordinated closely, meeting with council members both friendly and
hostile and defusing potential problems as the bill proceeded through
committee consideration to a full vote with remarkable speed. Your
correspondent, a volunteer peripheral observer to this operation, was
stunned and thrilled to watch the pros at work. The good example of
Montgomery, which may be replicated later this summer in Prince George’s
(though it may be a heavier lift) could set a tone for statewide success
in the 2016 session.

**ON DC DSA’S PLATE in July and August**: In a summer galvanized by
Senator Bernie Sanders’ challenge to the Democratic establishment, the
Metro DC local is mobilizing with National DSA to support the avowed
democratic socialist candidate via an independent expenditure, [**We
Need Bernie**](http://www.dsausa.org/weneedbernie). (What’s an
independent expenditure? A political action for or against a candidate
done without coordination with any candidate’s committee)

A training session for those wanting to be involved in *We Need Bernie*
is scheduled for the local’s **August special two-part membership
meeting**  Sunday, August 9, 2015, 1:30 p.m. to 4 at the [*Watha T.
Daniel/Shaw Neighborhood Library (WTD Meeting
Room)*](http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&hl=en&q=1630+7th+St+NW%2C+Washington%2C+DC%2C+20001%2C+us)
1630 7th St NW, Washington, DC across the street from the Shaw-Howard
Metrorail station on the Green Line. A visiting discussant (TBA) on the
“Evolving Politics of Climate Change” (1:30 – 2:30), will be followed by
a 1-Hour Training Session on “How Local DSAers Can Canvass for Bernie
Sanders” (2:30 – 3:30). Check the Meetup site for updates as the date
approaches.

The training session is recommended because DSA’s enthusiasm for a
socialist’s campaign within one of the capitalist parties has to be
tempered by election law. But trained DSA members can act as organized
individuals on behalf of Bernie Sanders’ candidacy at public events and
the local will actively seek locations where that can happen – tabling,
canvassing or leafleting. Watch the [*Meetup
site*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/) for opportunities to engage in
these activities, many of them on weekends at farmers’ markets and the
like.

The **Socialist Salon** in July (July 30) examines the white racist
right that is the quasi-organized force behind individual instance of
outrage like the mass murder in Charleston’s venerable black church.
It’s 6:30 p.m. at Hunan Dynasty, 215 Pennsylvania Ave SE but (as always)
check the [*Meetup site*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/) for fresh
information; note that it is the fifth Thursday this month, not the
third Thursday as it typically is.

The **Socialist Happy Hour** at Luna Grill in Dupont Circle takes place
the day before the Salon, July 29. Relax and talk about socialism – or
not – starting at 6:30 p.m., 1301 Connecticut Ave. NW.

The **Socialist Book Group** meets Sunday, Aug. 16 at 3 p.m. to discuss
Steve Fraser’s book, [*The Age of
Acquiescence*](https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Age_of_Acquiescence.html?id=s-9MBAAAQBAJ&source=kp_cover).
The group meets at the Kogod Courtyard of the National Portrait Gallery,
8^th^ and F. Streets NW right next to Gallery Place Metrorail station on
the Yellow/Green and Red lines.

The **August Socialist Salon**, still in formation, will examine the
sovereign debt crises of Greece and Puerto Rico, at whatever stage they
are at on August 20, when the Salon will take place (likely 6:30 p.m. at
Hunan Dynasty, 215 Pennsylvania Ave. SE, but check the Meetup site
closer to the date).

Updated information on all these events are found at the Metro DC DSA
[*Meetup site.*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/222712527/)

**OTHER UPCOMING EVENTS OF NOTE:**\
*IMMEDIATE*: On our publication day, our comrades at DC Jobs with
Justice [*hold a public
hearing*](https://actionnetwork.org/events/workers-rights-board-public-hearing-on-just-hours)
on “just hours” – giving more control over work hours and lives to
workers who are currently at the mercy of arbitrary scheduling and
unilateral management reduction of hours. It’s **today, July 14**, 6
p.m. at Pennsylvania Avenue Baptist Church, 3000 Pennsylvania Avenue SE,
Washington, DC 20020

*THIS WEEKEND*: A group of DCDSA members recently got a briefing from
staffers at the Venezuelan Embassy about conditions in that country
(under considerable economic and rhetorical attack by the US). Those
briefed recommend an upcoming public event at the Embassy, a panel
discussion on *The Latin American Alternative: 16 Years of Progressive
Transformations in Venezuela and Latin America* **Saturday, July 18th**,
3:00, at the Bolivarian Hall at the Venezuelan Embassy (2445
Massachusetts Ave. NW.).  Confirmed discussants are George
Ciccariello-Maher, an assistant professor of political science at Drexel
University in Philadelphia and author of *We Created Chávez: A People’s
History of the Venezuelan Revolution*, and Mark Weisbrot, co-director of
the Center for Economic and Policy Research, in Washington, DC.

*AUGUST*: [*Progressive Maryland*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/),
long a solid coalition group in Maryland but known mostly as being based
in Montgomery County until recently, is working to set up a companion
chapter in Prince George’s County. An organizing committee has met
several times in the past month and a date for an interest meeting has
just been set: **Thursday, August 13**, 6:30-8:30 p.m. The location is
TBA; check the site (above) for updates. South county Pastor Delman
Coates, Heather Mizeur’s running mate in last year’s gubernatorial
primary, is confirmed as keynoter.

**RESOURCE RECOVERY**: Here’s a link to where to donate to rebuild those
black churches in the South that have burned:
[*https://cccathedralstl.dntly.com/campaign/2571\#/donate*](https://cccathedralstl.dntly.com/campaign/2571#/donate)

****IN THIS ISSUE:****

Then there’s the other debt problem – the singular situation of **Puerto
Rico**, also staggered by overhanging debt but unable to seek bankruptcy
like US cities and counties because it’s considered a state. Not in the
important ways, but in the ways that Congress decreed to help big banks
lavish loans on the quasi-colony without risk of loss. The DSA National
Political Committee, on the initiative of our co-chair and NPC member
Jose Gutierrez, issued a statement calling for the US government (and a
reluctant GOP Congressional majority) to restructure the commonwealth’s
public debt. [*Read complete article\
*](http://dsadc.org/the-united-states-must-not-turn-puerto-rico-into-the-next-greece/)\
DSA’s July general meeting heard the veteran public power manager Dave
Freeman upbraid his fellow managers in public power for forgetting their
mandate and choosing safe, legacy fossil fuels over the clear necessity
for renewables. The cowboy-hatted octogenarian set a clear vision of
**the public-ness of public power** and its future. Andy Feeney and
Woody Woodruff provide this account with a flavor of Freeman’s witty,
acerbic perspective. [*Read complete
article.*](http://dsadc.org/public-power-is-a-socialist-success-story-says-former-head-of-tva-but-todays-managers-are-flubbing-their-chance-to-lead-a-green-revolution/)

There is a clear path for Sen. Bernie Sanders to win not only the
Democratic nomination but the presidency, says Bill Mosley – because his
agenda is that of the country’s hard-pressed voters. Mosley traces the
admittedly difficult threading of obstacles that could result in a
**President Sanders**, and urges socialists and other progressives to
act resolutely, with analogies to the storied California gubernatorial
campaign of Upton Sinclair. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/bernie-sanders-can-win/)

Left orthodoxy holds that reducing taxes to free the invisible hand of
growth and innovation is a blind alley, a mask for accumulation by
elites. Kameron Burt argues a contrarian position, suggesting that
**accumulation can help enable “the innovative potential of the working
class.”** He invokes Piketty and others to suggest that the suffocating
debt that can result stifles working-class opportunities to create, for
instance, worker co-ops. Public action to fuel these worker-based
enterprises is needed, he argues. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/the-effect-of-debt-and-risk-isnt-only-about-big-banks/)

Every new revelation about the **Trans Pacific Partnership** points to
incipient corporate victories and worker oppression, Andy Feeney
observes in this account of how the trade deal could cripple the US
Postal Service’s ability to broaden its revenue streams to stay alive in
the age of the mature Internet. Innovative plans such as banking
services, backed by the postal unions if not by Congress or USPS
leadership, would be stifled under the TPP. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/how-the-tpp-could-damage-the-u-s-postal-service/)

Nobody knows right now what the endgame will be at next year’s
Democratic National Convention – or if there will be one. Undeterred,
Woody Woodruff unveils a dream vision about **Bernie Sanders’ news
conference** as the convention opens and where he might stand at that
point in the campaign.[ *Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/bernie-sanderss-news-conference-at-the-2016-democratic-convention-a-dream-vision/)

There are plenty of ways to help the children of poverty avoid
marginalization as they grow to youth and then adulthood. A panel at the
Economic Policy Institute made it clear that **early childhood
education**, in its broadest sense, is a key strategy. Andy Feeney
presents the arguments of the expert panel, including some who would be
considered conservative in other respects. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/epi-forum-addresses-class-race-social-inequalities-in-kindergarten-and-how-pre-k-programs-can-lessen-them/)

**Good Reads** – This rather extensive edition of Good Reads probably
should be called the Bernie Edition because the socialist candidate has
been so much in the news and left commentary. But there are takes on the
Greek crisis, the passivity of the oppressed, an historical
contextualization of the Charleston church massacre, and the role of
violence in maintaining global order as well. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-midsummer-socialists/)

**You can read  past articles in the *Washington Socialist* on this
website where they are archived,** [***dsadc.org ***](http://dsadc.org/)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
<woodlanham@gmail.com>.

[*“The Effect of Debt and Risk isn’t Only about Big
Banks”*](http://dsadc.org/the-effect-of-debt-and-risk-isnt-only-about-big-banks/)

Monday, July 13th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2015**

*By Kameron Burt*

“Is it not true that wealth accumulation enables wealthy individuals to
take risks?” asked a young audience member during a recent
[*Intelligence
Squared*](http://www.intelligencesquared.com/events/spotlight-on-thomas-piketty/)
conversation with economist Thomas Piketty, of [**Capital in the
Twenty-First
Century**](http://www.amazon.com/dp/067443000X/?tag=googhydr-20&hvadid=58463205280&hvpos=1t1&hvexid=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=15861749087296661982&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=b&hvdev=c&ref=pd_sl_8x72gthsuo_b)
fame.

Any conversation in which one speaks about limiting (through taxes,
regulations, or expropriation) the ability of the rich to accumulate
vast wealth, inevitably evokes the accusation of attacking “Job
Creators.” Although the left political line generally rejects the notion
that capital accumulation is a good thing, I am going to take a
surprising position: that limiting accumulation *does* inhibit
innovation that creates jobs.

However, the common discourse narrows the debate on job creation to
focus only on the wealthy. Pundits generally ignore the innovative
potential of the working class, who are more and more incentivized to
take any [*mentally suffocating
job*](http://abcnews.go.com/ABC_Univision/News/college-grad-bored-work-fault/story?id=19704531)
to pay down increasing debt.

 

![](media/image2.png){width="3.125in" height="2.0in"}

 

*The Heavy Chains of Debt*

The Intelligence Squared audience member’s question echoes a general
train of economic thought that seems to run through academia and
business discourse: that [*the accumulation of wealth in the hands of a
few*](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/business-july-dec11-makingsense_10-26/)
allows them to take risks and innovate. These entrepreneurial endeavors
lead to new methods to combine capital and labor, creating new
employment opportunities, or so the story goes.

This is the justification given for the illustrious title “Job Creator”
that is bestowed upon the heads of the richest Americans. However, a
2011 report by the Institute for Competitiveness and Prosperity showed
that most jobs in the U.S. and Canada come from businesses under
[*five-years
old*](http://www.competeprosper.ca/uploads/ICAP_WP15_Final.pdf). Which
means that older firms with the most money and capital aren’t offering
many new employment opportunities.

However, to start a new firm requires a certain tolerance for risk.
There is a plethora of academic studies that investigate the relation
between firm debt levels and innovative risk taking. Indeed, a study by
Andreas Milidonis and Konstantinos Stathopoulos in the Journal of
Finance and Quantitative Analysis found that higher debt levels lowered
the willingness of upper management to take risks.

Unsurprisingly, this debt logic extends beyond existing capitalist firms
to would-be firms. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
[*reported*](http://www.consumerfinance.gov/newsroom/student-debt-domino-effect/)
that many university graduates cite student loan debt as a significant
deterrent to starting new businesses. Even if someone is willing to take
the risk, student loan debt may make it harder to get a lower-interest
business loan. And as student loan debt exploded to over [*\$1.2
trillion*](http://www.consumerfinance.gov/newsroom/student-debt-swells-federal-loans-now-top-a-trillion/)
in May 2013, this problem is not likely to dissipate.

Debt is also compounding the socioeconomic immobility of the poorest
workers. As traditional banks withhold loan services in low-income
communities, payday lenders with annual interest rates of anywhere from
[*391 to 521
percent*](http://www.responsiblelending.org/payday-lending/tools-resources/fast-facts.html)
have inserted themselves into these communities. Although the Federal
Reserve finds effect of payday loan on borrower bankruptcy
[*ambiguous*](http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201381/201381pap.pdf),
90 percent of borrowers have to take out repeated payday loans at an
annual cost of [*\$3.5
billion*](http://www.responsiblelending.org/payday-lending/tools-resources/fast-facts.html)
in fees.

It should come as no surprise that as the ability to start new
businesses decreases for the working class – an ability that allows them
greater control of the wealth of society – inequality will deepen.

However, “creating jobs” is a political ploy, used by absentee
shareholders to justify their wealth. From the socialist perspective,
job creation should not be a societal goal. What is important is
labor-saving innovations that *lessen* the aggregate *necessity* to
work.

*Less Debt, More Democracy*

Exploitative and unnecessary work continue if we allow a few indebted
proletarians to become capitalists and begin the cycle over again. The
typical “American Dream” rewards the successful small businessman/woman
with the right to exploit their fellow citizens with underpaid
employment. One may say this is a net gain – the business owner makes a
profit and the worker receives a job – but it must be weighed against
the alternative: a democratic business model.

Injecting democracy into the grinding machinery of the workplace would
allow the working class to take advantage of the entrepreneurial spirit
of capitalism, while retaining the benefits for the workers themselves.
Call it a worker-owned
[*coop*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/30/magazine/who-needs-a-boss.html).
Call it a
[*WSDE*](http://www.democracyatwork.info/articles/2012/07/wsdes/).

I call it the seed of a new, [*more
productive*](http://www.populareconomics.org/the-efficiency-of-worker-cooperatives-is-just-fine-thank-you/)
and just economic system: a socialistic economic system.

A national policy is needed to ease the debt burden *and* promote
innovation. One solution would be to provide full or partial loan
forgiveness to new graduates and debt-encumbered workers who decide to
start new cooperatives. Debt could be forgiven after a certain period of
time, similar to the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program which
forgives your federal student loan balance after 10 years of full-time
government or non-profit employment.

Another solution could be to refinance excess debt with a low-interest
public loan to new worker-owned cooperatives, with the option to convert
the new loan into a grant after five years of successful business. This
policy would incentivize people to create new value in society to lessen
their debt burden, rather merely taking a job for the paycheck.

However, policy theorizing doesn’t mean that we can forget the political
battle for working class power. Democracy is a difficult concept to
attack politically. So if the capitalist elite attack the worker-owner
concept, they also attack the idea of democracy itself. And if they
bellow with hollow claims of “anti-freedom” and “anti-democracy” –
against the rich, no doubt – we can respond like Piketty:

“I like accumulation; I like capital. I like it so much, I would like
more people to own more capital.”

[*Bernie Sanders Can Win*](http://dsadc.org/bernie-sanders-can-win/)

Monday, July 13th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

You read the headline correctly.  I believe Bernie Sanders can be
elected President.

Or at least that’s how those of us who support Sanders should approach
his campaign.  Not as a protest candidacy, nor as an exercise to burn
off our activist energy and feel good about the country for a few months
before becoming grumpy again once Hillary Clinton locks up the
nomination.  We need to envision Sanders and his explicitly socialist
message resonating with Democrats participating in the party primaries
and caucuses, and then appealing to the majority of voters in the
general election.

This is not to deny that Sanders is running an extremely long-shot
campaign, or that the Koch-led big-money political cartel will stop at
nothing to bury him.  Hillary Clinton will surely out-fundraise Sanders
many times over, even in the event a few millionaire radicals join the
Sanders cause.  Sanders will always be disadvantaged when it comes to
money.  His advantage is ideas and, potentially, numbers of people.

While money today is the biggest factor in who gets elected to office,
it is not the only factor.  If politics were merely a contest of who
could compile the largest war chest, students today might be studying
the presidencies of Nelson Rockefeller, John Connally and Steve Forbes. 
Ideas, and the voters’ perceptions of ideas, matter.

Political analysts have studied presidential campaigns (and those for
lower office) in minute detail, and their conclusions differ widely
about why particular candidates won, lost, or fared better or worse than
expected.  However, there is plenty of evidence that a
progressive-populist message resonates with a wide swath of voters.

In fact, even many politicians whose past records in office show little
fealty to true progressive or populist ideas feel the need to pretend to
be men or women of the people when running for the Democratic
nomination.  Hillary Clinton, she of the fat-cat contributors, first
lady of the administration that “ended welfare as we knew it” and tacked
to the right at every opportunity, [*recently launched her 2016
presidential campaign on a firmly populist
note*](http://www.cnn.com/2015/06/13/politics/hillary-clinton-roosevelt-island-rally/). 
“Prosperity can’t be just for CEOs and hedge fund managers. Democracy
can’t be just for billionaires and corporations,” she declared to her
supporters, emphasizing her support for a higher minimum wage, paid
family leave, equal pay legislation and banning workplace discrimination
against gays and lesbians.

That should surprise no one, since all Democratic presidential
candidates must appeal to a significant bloc of voters on the left to
win the nomination.  Some progressives have defected to the Green party
or become too disillusioned to vote, but to win in the Democratic
primaries a candidates still must appeal to, or at least appease, the
mass of left-leaning voters still in the party.  Frequently this is more
rhetoric than substance, as candidates from Jimmy Carter to Bill Clinton
to Barack Obama cast themselves in their campaigns as men of the people,
belying their past centrist histories and thrall to wealthy donors that
were more accurate predictors of their future actions.  Hillary Clinton,
to paraphrase the late Robert Young, isn’t a progressive but she plays
one on TV.

Jesse Jackson’s campaigns of 1984 and 1988 demonstrate the potential of
a prominent progressive running unapologetically on the left, not only
rhetorically but substantively as well, in the Democratic primaries.  In
both campaigns, but especially the latter one, he built a coalition of
people of color, union members, antiwar activists and others that made
him a serious, if ultimately unsuccessful, challenger for the Democratic
nomination.  Some voters who might have been attracted to his message
didn’t support him because he’d never held elective office and others
because of his race – not that they were necessarily hostile to having
an African American president, but that they felt the country wasn’t
“ready” for such a momentous step.  There were also efforts by Jackson’s
opponents to box him in as the “black” candidate, although his Rainbow
message was pitched to a far broader audience.  Even so, he was able to
mount a serious run for the nomination.  (Twenty years later, Obama
attracted some of the constituencies that shunned Jackson – not only was
he a senator and not as easily pigeonholed as a race candidate, but the
result showed the United States was now indeed “ready” for an African
American president, whether or not it had been in 1988).

Just a few cycles earlier, in 1972, George McGovern’s message of
economic equality and his strident opposition to the war in Vietnam
propelled him to the Democratic nomination against Hubert Humphrey, an
architect of both the Great Society and U.S. entanglement in the war. 
Unfortunately, a combination of corporate money for the Republicans and
Richard Nixon’s dog-whistle racial appeals (McGovern wants to give your
money to minorities, etc.) swamped McGovern in the general election.

The McGovern debacle notwithstanding, even in the general election
Democrats have often found that taking a populist line plays to their
advantage, in spite of the conventional wisdom that a Democrat must move
to the right after the convention in order to woo undecided centrists. 
Humphrey in 1968 nearly defeated Nixon when he adopted an unabashedly
progressive line in the campaign’s homestretch.  Likewise, Al Gore fared
best when he dropped his cautious talk about a Social Security “lockbox”
and challenged George W. Bush with more populist rhetoric – and Gore won
at the ballot box.  Michael Dukakis should have beaten George H.W. Bush
in 1988, but his almost issue-free campaign and emphasis on his
competence turned voters off like a faucet.

But perhaps the best precedent for a potential Sanders victory is not a
presidential election, but the 1934 race for governor in California, in
which outspoken socialist and muckraker Upton Sinclair – perhaps the
Bernie Sanders of his day, if Sanders were to take up writing novels –
made a successful run for the Democratic nomination.  There are
parallels aplenty between 1934 and today.  Sinclair was running during
the depths of the Great Depression, and he made the state’s widespread
poverty the centerpiece of his platform – he called his campaign the
“End Poverty in California” (EPIC) movement.  Likewise, Sanders is
running at a time when the economic meltdown of 2008 continues to
inflict pain on the majority of Americans, notwithstanding that the
wealthiest Americans are doing better than ever.  At least in Sinclair’s
California, nearly everyone was suffering the effects of the Depression;
after 2008 the wealthiest Americans kept on getting richer.

Sinclair, like Sanders, was castigated by many on the far left for
running as a Democrat.  Sinclair had been a member of the Socialist
Party up to 1934, when he switched to the Democrats in order seek the
nomination.  In 1934 the SP had much more vitality than today.  The
party was past its Debs-era electoral heyday, but it still was a force
at the local level, [*with socialist mayors in several
cities*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_elected_socialist_mayors_in_the_United_States). 
At the national level, the charismatic Norman Thomas was the party’s
regular presidential candidate.  Although Thomas’ vote total was never
more than a blip in the electoral standings, his 1932 platform included
a number of planks that were adopted as part of Franklin Roosevelt’s New
Deal.  So it was a great disappointment to many socialists when Sinclair
ran as a Democrat, just as Greens and others who fixate today on the
failings of Democratic officeholders expressed their dismay when Sanders
did the same on the presidential level, rather than run as an
independent (or a Green) in the general election.

According to [*Sinclair scholar James
Gregory*](http://depts.washington.edu/epic34/candidate.shtml), Sinclair
took advantage of the weakness of the Democratic Party in a state in
which Republicans outnumbered Democrats three to one, and he coasted to
victory in the primary by appealing to working-class voters who had
previously exercised little influence in the state’s politics.  But in
the general election, a united front of corporate interests – led by the
*Los Angeles Times* and Hollywood moguls – poured an influx of corporate
cash into GOP candidate Frank Merriam’s coffers and coordinated a
campaign of red-baiting and disinformation that led to Sinclair’s
defeat, with 1.1 million votes for Merriam to just under 900,000 for
Sinclair (see also Lauren Cooley’s *Upton Sinclair:  California
Socialist, Celebrity Intellectual*).

However, to a great extent, the EPIC campaign was a success, even if it
failed to elect Sinclair.  Gregory notes that

California voters …elected thirty-eight Democrats to the eighty seat
Assembly, twenty-four of them EPIC nominees. Several EPIC endorsed state
senators and U.S. Congressmen would also be taking office. In addition
EPIC candidates had captured Democratic central committee posts around
the state, giving the movement effective control of the party machinery.
. .Sinclair’s campaign marked the beginning of a powerful left presence
in the party. Though EPIC itself melted away, veterans of that campaign
formed the nucleus of a Democratic party faction that was ideologically
very liberal and soon closely tied to organized labor, especially the
left-wing CIO.

So a Socialist can win a Democratic nomination if the timing is right
and he (or she) can light a fire in the electorate.  But could Sanders,
operating on a national stage, emulate Sinclair in winning the
nomination, and then do him one better by winning the election?  Or are
socialists doomed to be relegated to winning local council seats in
crunchy-granola towns like Seattle?

The odds are long.  Even getting past Clinton, who will try to co-opt
Sanders on the issues while quietly accepting corporate contributions,
is a steep hill to climb.  If he succeeds, corporations and their
mouthpieces will declare all-out war in the general election.  Money and
red-bait invective will fly at Sanders like artillery fire.  And if he
is elected, Republicans in Congress will be no more likely to help
advance his agenda than they were for Obama.  It will require the
building of an impressive coalition – of union members, ideological
leftists, disillusioned Democrats, minorities, the poor and near-poor,
and many others – as well as a savvy and well-organized campaign to push
Sanders to victory.  Sanders’ platform speaks to the needs of a majority
of Americans, and it will be the job of Sanders’ supporters to break
through right-wing disinformation to bring this fact home.

However, like Sinclair, Sanders can accomplish much even if he fails to
win, or even be nominated.  Sanders is already attracting many
liberal-to-left voters to his campaign, voters tired of the mainstream
Democratic Party’s sellout to corporate interests who now see an
alternative to lesser-evilism, quixotic third-party campaigns or
dropping out altogether.  Like EPIC, a Sanders campaign could leave
behind a reinvigorated left electoral movement, one that could move the
Democratic Party and the national political conversation to the left. 
To make that happen, of course, depends on organizations of the left
such as DSA recruiting Sanders supporters and keeping them engaged after
the election.

We shouldn’t regard Sanders as a “protest” candidate, running to make a
point or pull Clinton to the left.  If political action means anything
in today’s America, then we have to enter the Sanders campaign with the
confidence that if his message reaches enough Americans loudly and
clearly, they will respond.  There is a path to victory for Sanders,
albeit a steep, rocky one studded with landmines.  But more
fundamentally, the stronger a candidate Sanders is, the better are the
chances of building a left political movement for the long term.

[*Bernie Sanders’s News Conference At the 2016 Democratic Convention: A
Dream
Vision*](http://dsadc.org/bernie-sanderss-news-conference-at-the-2016-democratic-convention-a-dream-vision/)

Monday, July 13th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2015**

*By Woody Woodruff*

\[A transcript of Sen. Bernie Sanders’s news conference as the
Democratic National Convention opened in Philadelphia, July 2016\]

Let me say, before I take questions, that I am pleased to be here with
the significant amount of support that has grown throughout the
primaries. We expect to be competitive through more than one ballot of
the convention, given the delegates we have won. Gov. O’Malley and I
have largely fought for the same advanced progressive issues and
policies and there are only a few where we differ; we are providing a
pretty solid front for that program. Both my campaign and Gov.
O’Malley’s are well represented on the Platform Committee and we are
expecting to see some changes in the final version put forward by the
Platform Committee tomorrow.

Our campaign continues to insist that this party, the party of working
people, offer a very different vision of the future to the voters than
the Republican plan for more wars, more corporate dominance, and more
oppression of those now coming under the thumb of the billionaire class
in this country.

We call for significant new constraints on financial commerce and a
recapturing of its fraudulent gains through a financial transactions
tax; a reversal of the Citizens United decision that has turned our
electoral system into a casino; a move from the Affordable Care Act
forward toward single-payer health care; a path toward free public
higher education along with K-12 schools that bring all American
youngsters to parity in readiness for college or work; improved
prospects for manufacturing at home through industrial policy with
opportunities for collective action by workers in the US as well as in
all nations included in our trade agreements AND a \$15 federal minimum
wage; passing a real infrastructure bill to keep the national substance
from crumbling any further and provide good jobs; raising the cap on the
payroll tax to keep Social Security sound for the next century. Now that
the President has had the Trans Pacific Partnership treaty turned down
by Congress, we can begin to fashion a trade agreement that is good for
workers, not for corporate lobbyists. And our criminal justice system
has made baby steps toward reforms that can eliminate police terror in
minority communities and end the selective arrest, prosecution and
incarceration of minorities; we will pursue those goals vigorously.

Those demands as a package can restore the health and political power of
the American middle class, which has been crushed by the catastrophic
recession caused by financial interests who paid no price for their
criminal negligence but instead profited from the misery of the
majority. Without a middle class that has that vigor and power, American
politics will remain the dismal, gridlocked thing that it has become.
Democrats must clearly state that those are our goals. Republicans
simply cannot do the same, given the premises of their party.

Our campaign has not only been about advancing all those policies and
programs, but about clarifying for the voters that there is essentially
a single reason that we need to address all those areas – the economic
system in this country, which is stacked for the billionaires and
against working people. Only by tackling all those factors
comprehensively can we alter the economic arrangements so that we avoid
the Whack-A-Mole dilemma of fixing one problem only to find that another
problem has become aggravated as the capitalist system adjusts itself to
maintain its advantage. The system must be reformed to benefit people,
not corporate profits. And our increasing number of supporters indicates
that that message is getting across as never before in recent history.

We recognize that Secretary Clinton leads all of us in delegate strength
at this point but that no one has the delegates for the nomination.
Whoever is the nominee, the solid progressive perspective is now firmly
established as the stance of the Democratic Party, something it has been
missing for decades.

Now I’ll take questions. Yes, in the second row…

BABINGTON, AP: Senator, by this time in the campaign most candidates
have settled on one, or at most two, major issues on which to run or
campaign. You persist in going with this … ah… laundry list. Why?

SANDERS: You need to be systematic when you are taking on a system. The
collapse of our infrastructure, our manufacturing economy, our
educational system, our labor market and unions, our system of social
support, our system for choosing our leaders – all those are tightly
linked to the dominance of corporate finance. Most of these corporate
people are not evil – this is the way the system behaves and they want
it to continue to work to their advantage. To free them from their own
bondage we have to change the system.

Look, the arrangements that have developed over the years in our
legislatures create the false impression that you can only do one or two
big things at a time. This is false, but it is no accident. It plays
into the hands of corporate bosses and the millionaire class because
while you are trying to fix those one or two things, they are busy in
the back rooms further corrupting and distorting – to their advantage — 
the rest of these factors that make up our everyday lives.  If you want
to make genuine gains for the American people, you have to push on all
these fronts simultaneously.

The argument that the American people are not ready for change of this
magnitude is easily accepted by many, including you folks in the media –
but it has never been tried, not since the desperate years of the
Depression. When you try to do those sorts of things when you are on
your knees, you can change your perspective quickly. The real experiment
is to accomplish these things when we are at least halfway still on our
feet. I argue it can be done, and that the people will respond – they
are responding.

Yes, in the back there…

MOBERG, IN THESE TIMES: Senator, you ran as an independent and you call
yourself a socialist. Why are you engaged with the Democratic Party
right now? And a follow-up question.

As I have said, the Democrats have been responding a little too readily
to Wall Street and corporate money in recent decades. This is not
strange. When electoral politics gets this corrupted by big money, the
corporations are the only game in town. If the Democrats hadn’t played
the game, if they had unilaterally disarmed, we probably wouldn’t have
had a two-term Democratic president. Things haven’t been great,
politically, but I can imagine them worse without that.

Nevertheless, the Democrats have traditionally been the party of working
people, the party fighting big money, and they can be that again – are
becoming that, right now, in this campaign. That’s what my campaign has
been about – not only fighting against the Wall Street influence but
keeping those issues on the table and changing the Democratic Party,
bringing back some of the spirit of the New Deal.

MOBERG,  IN THESE TIMES: my followup – if you don’t secure the
Democratic nomination, will you run as an independent or seek the Green
Party nomination?

I support Ralph Nader on most of the issues and I don’t blame him for
Bush v. Gore. Jill Stein would make a fine president, almost as good as
me. But there’s no sense in giving this Supreme Court the option to
appoint another Bush. I will support the Democratic nominee, but I will
continue to support the issue positions I have been supporting – all of
them.

Thank you.

[*EPI Forum Addresses Class, Race, Social Inequalities In Kindergarten,
And How Pre-K Programs Can Lessen
Them*](http://dsadc.org/epi-forum-addresses-class-race-social-inequalities-in-kindergarten-and-how-pre-k-programs-can-lessen-them/)

Monday, July 13th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

Even as they enter kindergarten, young children in the United States
face different chances of success that vary by race, ethnicity and
language background and socio-economic class.  Of these factors
affecting the intellectual and emotional readiness of kindergarten
students to learn, the most important is class, according to a recent
research paper by Emma Garcia and Elaine Weiss of the Economic Policy
Institute (EPI).

A summary of their study, *Inequalities at the Starting Gate,* was
presented to attendees at a June 17 forum and panel discussion on
Capitol Hill sponsored by the Broader, Bolder Approach to Education
(BBA), an educational reform group funded by the Annie E. Casey
Foundation and other philanthropies and based on a public policy task
force originally organized by EPI president Larry Mishel in 2008.

In the summary of *Inequalities at the Starting Gate,* Garcia and Weiss
conclude:  “social class is the single factor with the most influence on
how ready to learn a child is when she first walks through the school’s
kindergarten door.  Low social class puts children far behind from the
start.  Race and ethnicity compound that disadvantage, largely due to
factors also related to social class.”

The implications for U.S. public schools and the children who attend
them are daunting, judging from Garcia and Weiss’s research and related
materials distributed at the June 17 event.  Some 46 percent of black
children and 63 percent of non-English-speaking Hispanic children are
currently living in poverty.  Some 65 percent of black children are
living in single-parent families, a factor that aggravates the
educational drawbacks relating to poverty alone, and approximately 53
percent of Hispanic children lack access to the kinds of preschool
programs that can help to counteract the effects of poverty.

According to a brochure prepared under BBA’s auspices and distributed at
the forum, *Building High Quality Early Support Systems for Children and
Families: A Guide for State Policy,* the demands by American politicians
and prominent business leaders for “educational reform” are being voiced
today “in the wake of a record number of children living in poverty and
a rapidly changing student population” – factors that make educational
progress hard to achieve for many students, regardless of whether the
‘reforms’ succeed.  (Most progressives see the alleged reforms as thinly
disguised attempts to break public school teacher unions,  an issue the
EPI discussion materials on preschool preparation did not explore one
way or another.)

The incidence of premature births happening in the U.S. today compares
with the incidence of premature births in the Sudan, *Building High
Quality Early Support Systems* notes in passing. Uneven prenatal care
regimes related to poverty therefore affect childrens’ preparedness in
tandem with other factors. Only half of the young children in the U.S.
today are attending publicly supported preschool programs, vs. 84
percent in other developed capitalist nations.

Meanwhile, the brochure charges, “relative child poverty is higher in
the U.S. than in every other developed country but Romania,” making it
hard to imagine how the U.S. will raise a future work force that helps
this country to compete internationally.

On the other hand, participants in the EPI forum indicated that the good
news is that some prominent U.S. business leaders and economists, as
well as even a few Republicans, are increasingly willing to support
national or (more commonly) state-level early childhood intervention
programs that attempt to tackle the educational disadvantages of the
least-prepared children, if only in the name of “human capital”
development and economic efficiency.

For example, one participant in the panel discussion that accompanied
the June 17 was Rob Grunewald, an economist with the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, who has coauthored research on the economic costs
to the wider society of poorly prepared, disadvantaged children being
unready for kindergarten, and who has tried to calculate the economic
benefits of programs promoting early childhood education.

The BBA’s *Guide for State Policy,* in a similar vein, includes
thumbnail sketches of promising early childhood education and childhood
health care support programs that have been underway for years in some
rather surprising states with reputations for otherwise very
conservative politics.

Oklahoma, for example, boasts one of the nation’s most extensive
programs for providing free, voluntary, pre-kindergarten education to
4-year-olds, both from disadvantaged and from relatively middle-class
families.  During the 2011-2012 school year, the *Guide for State
Policy* indicates, some 74 percent of Oklahoma 4-year-olds were enrolled
in such programs.  However, Oklahoma is only the second state to have
established such pre-K programs; the first was Georgia.

Another childhood intervention program recommended by many early
childhood education advocates, “Smart Start,” endeavors to provide high
quality health care and childcare services to young children and their
parents from disadvantaged backgrounds.  North Carolina, another
generally conservative state, has had a “well regarded” Smart Start
initiative in place since the early 1990s, according to the BBA state
policy guide, and now provides services to disadvantaged children from
birth through the age of 5.

In 2002, North Carolina also supplemented its Smart Start initiative
with a program called More at Four, which provides funds to counties to
pay for pre-K educational services to 4-year-olds in “a variety of
settings,” ranging from public schools and Head Start programs to
for-profit community centers.

Arkansas, similarly, established a program in 1991 called Arkansas
Better Chance or ABC, which by the 2011-2012 school year was providing
pre-K educational programs to 37 percent of the state’s 4-year-olds and
some 10-percent of its 3-year-olds.  Kentucky too now has a “high
quality pre-kindergarten program,” thanks in large part to support from
a “broad leadership” in favor of educational reform, “including that of
the business community” and state philanthropic leaders.

In fact by late 2013, the *Guide for State Policy* relates, “all but ten
states and Washington, D.C., funded pre-K programs, though few
three-year-olds were served and access and quality still varied widely.”

Another briefing material handed out with the packets at the EPI forum
makes an argument that well designed preschool educational programs and
health care and parenting assistance programs for disadvantaged young
mothers will more than pay for themselves over time. The short book by
Timothy J. Bartik, a senior economist with the privately funded Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research, advocates enhancing the social,
emotional and professional skills of future adult workers, generating
better health outcomes for children and future parents and reducing the
chances that disadvantaged kids will end up in the criminal justice
system.

Bartik’s research, summarized in *From Preschool to Prosperity: The
Economic Payoff to Early Childhood Education,* emphasizes the potential
economic benefits of better childhood support and educational programs
even to childless people who have no direct involvement with the public
schools except as taxpayers.

Bartik also identifies three preferred forms of early childhood
intervention programs that he says are of proven cost-effectiveness:
“universal” pre-K programs for 4-year-olds; so-called Educare services
for disadvantaged children, from birth through age 5; and Nurse Family
Partnership (NFP) services for disadvantaged first-time mothers, to
teach them parenting skills that will help them raise both their
first-born children and all their children who follow.

If the best mix of these three programs were implemented nationwide at
an estimated net cost of about \$79 billion annually, Bartik’s book
argues, this investment would increase the present value of future
earnings of  affected children by “a multiple of two and three times”
total program costs.  What’s more, positive “spillover effects” from the
programs might be more than double the economic benefits to future adult
wage earners in terms of higher incomes, and “anticrime benefits might
be at least as valuable as the earnings benefits.”

Despite the potential benefits of pre-K programs and growing support for
such programs among state legislators and a part of the capitalist
business community, however, federal funding support for good state
programs faces an uncertain future at best given the current Republican
control over both houses of Congress.  And in their study, Garcia and
Weiss argue that really effective cures for the adverse educational
effects of poverty need to extend beyond the schools to addressing the
problem of poverty itself.

In addition to funding and supporting good pre-K programs, they
conclude, Congress and the White House should take several other steps.

Their recommendations include (a) raising the minimum wage; (b)
supporting new job creation, both through Federal Reserve Board policies
affecting interest rates and through government investments in
infrastructure repair and upgrading; (c) sustaining and extending
federal “safety net” programs such as unemployment insurance and food
stamps to make sure they reach everyone in need; (d) reforming
corrections policies so that fewer disadvantaged children suffer from
having parents in prison; (e) reforming immigration policies that limit
the life chances of Hispanic children; and (f) fixing “societal and
structural biases” — notably including continuing residential racial
segregation – ”that compound the effects of poverty for children of
color.”

Democratic socialists and other readers who are concerned about the
future of American children, whether we are operating from an explicitly
anti-capitalist perspective or not, may want to read more deeply in
*Inequalities at the Starting Gate,* which can be accessed through the
BBA web addresses here:

A brief overview of the BBA can be found online at
[*http://www.boldapproach.org/about*](http://www.boldapproach.org/about). 
An agenda for the June 17 forum and links to various background
materials presented at the forum, along with brief bios of the
participants, are available at
[*http://www.boldapproach.org/isg-release-rfk-screening*](http://www.boldapproach.org/isg-release-rfk-screening).
An overview of BBA’s general stance on early childhood education
programs can be found at
[*http://www.boldapproach.org/early-childhood-education*](http://www.boldapproach.org/early-childhood-education)
.

*The Guide for State Policy* on *Building High Quality Early Support
Systems for Children and Families* is available at
[*http://bit.ly/eceguide*](http://bit.ly/eceguide). Tim Bartik maintains
a blog on early childhood programs and the economy at
[*http://investinginkids.net/*](http://investinginkids.net/) .

Rob Grunewald has authored and coauthored a number of articles on the
economic merits of educational programs, including early childhood
education programs, which are listed on his web page profile at the
Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank.

One of Grunewald’s more pivotal studies was titled “Early Childhood
Development:  Economic Development with a High Public Return,” and was
coauthored with Arthur J. Rolnick, senior vice president and director of
research at the Minneapolis Fed through 2010.  It can be accessed at
[*https://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/fedgazette/early-childhood-development-economic-development-with-a-high-public-return*](https://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/fedgazette/early-childhood-development-economic-development-with-a-high-public-return)
.

[*GOOD READS FOR MIDSUMMER
SOCIALISTS*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-midsummer-socialists/)

Monday, July 13th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2015**

The great Adolph Reed kicks out a few jam(b)s on the parsing of racism,
privilege and some other recent fancy terms. From Doug Henwood’s *Left
Business Observer*…
[*http://www.leftbusinessobserver.com/Antiracism.html*](http://www.leftbusinessobserver.com/Antiracism.html)

From *People’s World*, a long view by a CP veteran, Sam Webb, on the
Charleston murders, their roots in the visceral right-wing reaction to
Obama’s election, and the perspective offered by MLK’s fluid strategy
for recovering society’s human potential.
[*http://peoplesworld.org/charleston-the-republican-right-and-the-lessons-of-martin-luther-king/*](http://peoplesworld.org/charleston-the-republican-right-and-the-lessons-of-martin-luther-king/)

A call from an analytical left group, the Left Strategy Collective, for
full understanding of what a left strategy would look like and some
notes on how to get there, from *Portside*:
[*http://portside.org/2015-06-09/audacity-win-call-strategy-us-left*](http://portside.org/2015-06-09/audacity-win-call-strategy-us-left)

Another from *Portside*, suggesting that a new NLRB rule is aiding union
organizing by preventing employers from being able to delay union vote –
a practice that allows employers a freer hand to fire dissidents or
conduct captive-audience brainwashing sessions.
[*http://portside.org/2015-06-23/new-rule-speeds-unionization-votes-say-organizers*](http://portside.org/2015-06-23/new-rule-speeds-unionization-votes-say-organizers)

A writer in the *Atlantic* magazine suggests that the independent
arbitration sections of the Trans-Pacific Partnership violate the US
Constitution… a provocative view first noted on Jonathan Shurberg’s
blog, the *Maryland Scramble*.
[*http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/06/tpp-isds-constitution/396389/*](http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/06/tpp-isds-constitution/396389/)

Tom Edsall’s lengthy analyses in the *New York Times* make frequent
appearances here in Good Reads – perhaps because his accounts imply, if
not state, socialist conclusions. Here he asks what factors are
preventing the poorest in the US from engaging in widespread protest
against their state.
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/24/opinion/why-dont-the-poor-rise-up.html?action=click&pgtype=Homepage&module=opinion-c-col-left-region&region=opinion-c-col-left-region&WT.nav=opinion-c-col-left-region&\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/24/opinion/why-dont-the-poor-rise-up.html?action=click&pgtype=Homepage&module=opinion-c-col-left-region&region=opinion-c-col-left-region&WT.nav=opinion-c-col-left-region&_r=0)

In a piece stemming from Edsall’s column, Helaine Olen argues in *Slate*
that Edsall doesn’t sufficiently weigh the power of the US “civil
religion” of individualism and the reflexive way it shames the poor
about their status…
[*http://www.slate.com/articles/business/the\_bills/2015/06/new\_york\_times\_op\_ed\_on\_why\_the\_poor\_won\_t\_rise\_up\_give\_credit\_to\_our\_culture.html*](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/the_bills/2015/06/new_york_times_op_ed_on_why_the_poor_won_t_rise_up_give_credit_to_our_culture.html)

A review of a new book on the roots of pervasive global violence:
“Widespread violence, \[the authors\] argue, is in fact an expression of
the underlying social order, and whether it is carried out by military
forces or by patterns of investment, the aim is to strengthen that order
for the benefit of the powerful.” From *Monthly Review* via *Portside*…

[*http://portside.org/2015-06-28/hidden-structure-violence-who-benefits-global-violence-and-war*](http://portside.org/2015-06-28/hidden-structure-violence-who-benefits-global-violence-and-war)

Michael Albert, in a very conversational piece in *Telesur*, puts the
pros and cons of the Sanders campaign into the widest possible framework
in terms of individual action, suggesting that one cannot know for sure
how it will play out, so immediate dismissal or total embrace have equal
risks:
[*http://www.telesurtv.net/english/opinion/-Support-Bernie-Sanders—But-How-20150622-0004.html*](http://www.telesurtv.net/english/opinion/-Support-Bernie-Sanders---But-How-20150622-0004.html)

Also from *Telesur*, our own Joe Schwartz lays out a framework for
understanding the dynamic of the Sanders campaign in US politics and how
it can build toward a left hegemony that has real power in the polity.
[*http://www.telesurtv.net/english/opinion/The-Sanders-Campaign-and-the-Revival-of-Socialism-in-the-US-20150708-0028.html*](http://www.telesurtv.net/english/opinion/The-Sanders-Campaign-and-the-Revival-of-Socialism-in-the-US-20150708-0028.html)

And Joe’s piece in the latest Democratic Left is a companion to that
framework, focusing on the counter-radical design features of the US
electoral system.
[*http://www.dsausa.org/socialists\_and\_the\_u\_s\_political\_system\_dl*](http://www.dsausa.org/socialists_and_the_u_s_political_system_dl)

Still more views on the Sanders campaign have been coming from
*Portside*, notably these paired essays from significant veterans of the
left, the Socialist Party’s David McReynolds and the Green Party’s Ted
Glick. McReynolds’ column originated as an e-mail from his [*Edge
Left*](http://www.edgeleft.org/) site (but it’s not posted there);
Glick’s originated at [*his personal
website*](http://tedglick.com/future-hope-columns/bernie-and-the-green-party/)

[*https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?tab=cm\#inbox/14e7732a5878f3e5*](https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?tab=cm#inbox/14e7732a5878f3e5)

And for a Maryland perspective by (again) Jon Shurberg of the blog
*Maryland Scramble*, here’s his hilarious send-up of *Politico* (“*Tiger
Beat* on the Potomac) and its effort to find Democrats who will trash
Bernie and help re-draw the unsettled line between “Good Democrats” and
those who are “out there.”

[*http://marylandscramble.com/2015/07/13/psssst-didja-hear-sanders-is-a-socialist/*](http://marylandscramble.com/2015/07/13/psssst-didja-hear-sanders-is-a-socialist/)

As this newsletter goes “to press” the fate of Greece at the hands of
the Protestant Ethic is still undetermined. But in a fine piece in the
*New York Times*, columnist Eduardo Porter reminds the Germans of some
debt relief they have sought and received – including from Greece – in
the past they are so busy forgetting. “The recurring, historical
pattern? Major debt overhangs are only solved after deep write-downs of
the debt’s face value,” Porter observes. The longer it takes to realize
that, the bigger the write-down. 
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/08/business/economy/germanys-debt-history-echoed-in-greece.html*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/08/business/economy/germanys-debt-history-echoed-in-greece.html)

[*How the TPP Could Damage the U.S. Postal
Service*](http://dsadc.org/how-the-tpp-could-damage-the-u-s-postal-service/)

Monday, July 13th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

U.S. adoption of the proposed Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) treaty, in
addition to eliminating or threatening American jobs and overriding the
democratic decisions of state, local and national government, could also
frustrate plans by the four postal workers’ unions to protect and expand
the U.S. Postal Service, union representatives told participants in a
June 28 conference call for anti-TPP activists.

Under the auspices of the American Postal Workers Union (APWU),
consultants with a recently formed economic policy group called
Commonomics have been exploring a recent proposal by the Postal
Service’s Office of Inspector General to establish postal banking
services in the U.S., with local post offices serving as banking
offices.  Similar systems of postal banking exist in [*some other
advanced industrial
societies.*](http://www.bna.com/banking-post-office-n17179892100/)

Marc Armstrong, a cofounder of Commonomics, is one of the consultants
working on a project to make U.S. postal banking a reality.  Armstrong
told anti-TPP activists participating in the conference call that the
Postal Service, through its existing system for sending and receiving
money orders, already has the capacity to provide banking services. 
However, its system for handling money orders is outdated
technologically compared to that of Pay Pal, as an example, and it lacks
a Federal Reserve bank-routing number such as those that commercial U.S.
banks have.  Under existing laws, the Postal Service is also forbidden
from embarking on new business lines or offering new products without
congressional authorization.

If these stumbling blocks were overcome, Armstrong said, the Postal
Service could provide postal banking services that would provide a
much-needed alternative to the payday loan companies that currently
serve some 34 million Americans, at ruinously high interest rates.

People with low incomes currently accept the burdensome terms offered by
the payday lenders because they fear incurring extremely high overdraft
fees at the hands of commercial banks. A national system of postal
banking could help low-income workers and consumers to avoid both the
banking industry’s high overdraft fees and the high interest rates of
the payday lenders, thus providing significant benefits to millions of
households.

There are provisions in the draft version of the TPP, however, that
would make the establishment of postal banking services and/or the
establishment of publicly funded and operated banks more vulnerable to
lawsuits than they are today.  Such publicly operated banks could be
deemed unfair competition with private enterprises and thus subject to
TPP sanctions, Armstrong indicated.

The TPP also could limit how much the Postal Service can compete with
private package carriers such as FedEx and UPS, Katherine Isaac, a
special assistant to APWU president Mark Dimondstein, told conference
call participants.  Package delivery is an increasingly crucial part of
the Postal Service’s business, Isaac indicated.

Although volumes of first class mail delivery in the U.S. have dropped
significantly as people turn increasingly to email over the Internet,
cutting into Postal Service revenues, the Postal Service today is
delivering some 2.2 million packages daily for FedEx, its competitor.  A
significant fraction of UPS packages also are delivered by the Postal
Service, for UPS and FedEx would prefer not to make deliveries in
certain neighborhoods.

Under the Constitution, however, the Postal Service is obligated to
provide service to the entire country.  Its revenues from package
delivery therefore are quite significant, and it would operate at an
annual profit were it not for provisions in the so-called Postal
Accountability and Enhancement Act of 2006, passed by a lame-duck
Republican Congress, that require it to pre-fund the projected health
care benefits of its retirees some 75 years into the future.

One section of the proposed TPP, to the extent it has been revealed to
the public, is designed to expand the ability of private enterprise to
compete with government entities, Isaac told conference call
participants. This might be interpreted as limiting the Postal Service’s
ability to compete with private package carriers. In addition, an annex
to a separate trade agreement now before the World Trade Organization
(WTO) would specifically restrict the Postal Service’s ability to
compete with private carriers on the basis of price.

Arguably, then, Postal Service employees and millions of Postal Service
customers are potential recruits to the growing coalition aimed at
blocking TPP’s approval by Congress.  Despite cuts in service and
closings of mail processing centers that have been forced on the agency,
the Postal Service still operates some 30,000 local post offices around
the country and is the “most liked” of all federal agencies according to
polling data.  If a significant fraction of those served by the Post
Office enter the political fight to block TPP’s adoption, this could be
a significant gain for the progressive anti-TPP coalition.

The APWU has launched a “Grand Alliance” to save the Postal Service from
further cuts.  *Washington Socialist* readers who would like to support
the Grand Alliance, either by joining it as individuals or by urging
organizations in which we are members to join it, can find more
information about the Alliance at
­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­[*http://agrandalliance.org/*](http://agrandalliance.org/)
.  Readers interested in learning more about the postal banking campaign
and about Commonomics, whose organizers hope for it to play a pivotal
role in protecting the public commons and exposing efforts by corporate
interests to privatize the commons, can do so at
­­­­­­­­­­­­[*http://www.commonomicsusa.org/*](http://www.commonomicsusa.org/)
and
[*http://www.commonomicsusa.org/solutions*](http://www.commonomicsusa.org/solutions)
.

[*The United States Must Not Turn Puerto Rico into the Next
Greece*](http://dsadc.org/the-united-states-must-not-turn-puerto-rico-into-the-next-greece/)

Monday, July 13th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2015**

*This statement on the debt crisis in Puerto Rico was issued by the DSA
National Political Committee July 3, 2015*

Once again the U.S. government is neglecting the fate of the people of
Puerto Rico when it suits the interests of the powerful, the wealthy
bondholders who own Puerto Rico’s debt obligations. Puerto Rico’s
governor, Alejandro Garcia Padilla, contends that to pull the island out
of a “death spiral,” the Commonwealth must be able to renegotiate
payment on its roughly \$72 billion in debts.

Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) calls on all political parties in
Puerto Rico, the U. S. Congress, and the Obama Administration to join
together to develop a long-term plan that addresses the root causes of
this crisis.

The U.S. government should provide economic aid to help restructure
Puerto Rico’s government and public corporate debt so as to lower its
debt burden and the costs of repayment. By refusing to consider such
policies, political elites in Washington are guaranteeing that severe
austerity programs will lead to brutal cuts in ordinary people’s living
standards. This lowering of the quality of life for ordinary Puerto
Ricans aims to ensure that the wealthy holders of Puerto Rican debt are
repaid. The repayment crisis is in large part due to a long-term
economic crisis caused by corporate disinvestment from the island. Thus,
the costs of restoring economic health to the island should be borne
primarily by those who continued to profit during the crisis.

DSA urges the broad social justice movement to work to ensure that our
brothers and sisters in Puerto Rico receive the federal aid that would
allow them to emerge from this long-standing economic crisis in a humane
and equitable manner. This can be done, but only if the federal
government does not treat Puerto Rico in a manner analogous to how the
European elites are treating Greece. The economic crisis has forced many
Puerto Ricans to leave their homeland, with recent migration meaning
Puerto Ricans will soon surpass people of Cuban descent as the largest
Hispanic group in Florida.

Puerto Rico is a U.S. territory with Commonwealth status whose
residents, since 1917, are U.S. citizens by birth. Although its 3.6
million residents are U.S. citizens, Puerto Ricans cannot vote in the
U.S. general presidential elections because Puerto Rico is not a state.

The island’s economy has been shrinking or stagnant for a decade, and
the official unemployment rate sits at nearly 12 percent. Lawmakers in
Washington and San Juan need to come up with a plan that addresses the
financial and economic problems of the territory, which must include a
lowering of the debt burden borne by Puerto Rico. The federal government
failed to bail out a Detroit devastated by disinvestment by the auto
industry; Puerto Rico must not be allowed to suffer due to disinvestment
by biopharmaceuticals and other industries that have moved abroad in
search of even cheaper production costs.

Because Puerto Rico is a territory, government-owned companies such as
the electric utility are not allowed to restructure their debt in
Chapter 9 bankruptcies. Twenty-five percent of Puerto Rican debt is held
by these state-owned enterprises. Congress should approve a new bill
that would allow these and other Puerto Rican government-owned
companies, as well as municipalities, to use Chapter 9. Most Democrats
support this legislation, but Republicans are steadfastly opposed. If
need be, the entire government of Puerto Rico should be able to file for
bankruptcy. States cannot file under Chapter 9, but Puerto Rico is not a
state.

In short, the present crisis is the culmination of decades of U.S.
policies that distorted Puerto Rico’s political and economic
development.

After the United States conquered the island in 1898 as the result of
the Spanish-American war, Puerto Rico’s economy, which had been based on
a mix of small landowners and subsistence farmers, was transformed into
an agro-industrial economy dominated by U.S. companies. Later, in the
1940s, in Operation Bootstrap, U.S. policy promoted a manufacturing
sector (combined with the forced sterilization of many Puerto Rican
women) but one limited to manufacturing industries that benefitted U.S.
transnational corporations. Puerto Rico was never allowed to define its
own economic destiny by, for example, negotiating bilateral trade
agreements; Puerto Rico also has had to adhere to fiscal policy directed
by the United States. External control and extraction of profits stunted
the country’s productive base. Recent changes in the U.S. tax code have
caused the loss of thousands of manufacturing jobs and have been one of
the factors leading to the current crisis.

Sixty percent of the island’s population – over 2 million patients –
receives their care through Medicare, Medicare Advantage or Medicaid.
Puerto Ricans pay the same Social Security and Medicare taxes as the
fifty states, yet Puerto Rico’s Medicaid program receives a 70 percent
lower reimbursement rate compared to mainland states. This low rate is
being temporarily supplemented by a federal grant that will soon expire.
As democratic socialists, we believe access to quality health care is a
right, not a privilege; it is time to restore federal Medicaid
reimbursement parity for Puerto Ricans.

In addition, the federal government has not adequately addressed the
serious environmental legacy problems stemming from U.S. military
exercises in Puerto Rico. There has been a decades-long pattern of delay
and inaction when it comes to remediating the environmental problems
that were left behind by the U.S. Navy on the island of Vieques and
elsewhere.

Democratic Socialists of America calls on Congress to support the right
of the people of Puerto Rico to self-determination, including the right
to define their relationship with the United States in accordance with
international law. The people of Puerto Rico must have a democratic
voice in all issues and policies that directly affect them. We also urge
Congress to grant Puerto Rico the forms of debt relief, debt
rescheduling, and federal aid that will allow Puerto Rico to grow its
way out of the long-term depression in a manner that enhances the
quality of life of all residents of the island, not just its elite.

 

Passed by the DSA National Political Committee: July 2, 2015.
