***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the March 2013 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the Washington Socialist for March
2013*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-washington-socialist-for-march-201/)

Environmental concerns and worker health top the agenda this month. The
DC Metro DSA local prioritized its activity for 2013 at its February
meeting and members chose to focus on the “Sick Leave for All” campaign
that several of our [*ally groups
*](http://rocunited.org/healthy-families-act-hfa/)are also highlighting.
Several offerings in this issue expand on that, including one on the
effort underway to pass a significant Maryland bill expanding sick leave
in private-sector businesses. DCDSA members also participated in the
largest US climate-change rally ever, by most accounts – the Feb. 17
protest against the Keystone XL pipeline and for alternative energy. A
DSA flyer distributed at that event has been revised as a broad article
on socialist perspectives on climate change. In Socialist Takes, a
roundup of short items, be sure to note that at our March meeting,
Saturday, March 9, we’ll be electing a steering (executive) committee
for the next year – and all DC Metro DSA members can and should vote.

Here’s the lineup. Click on the links to read individual articles, or
scroll down.

[***Liberty for
whom?***](http://dsadc.org/with-liberty-and-justice-for-all/) *Kurt
Stand* discusses the ways in which concepts of freedom can be distorted
in the service of inequality and oppression , with the principal example
of low-paid workers with no sick leave or health coverage.

[***Friedan’s
Legacy***](http://dsadc.org/betty-friedan-and-the-building-of-a-feminist-political-infrastructure/)
– Betty Friedan, who galvanized the feminist movement with *The Feminist
Mystique*, had to dampen her radicalism and radical history to be the
mother of the movement. *Carolyn Byerly* recalls the diversity within
the women’s movement at the center of which Friedan’s life and writing
stood.

[***Bringing Justice to the energy
transition***](http://dsadc.org/dsas-green-aspect/): *Andy Feeney* and
*Woody Woodruff* expand on the local’s message at the KXL pipeline
protest, outlining the potential disruption to modes of work and the way
to rally labor forces to support the campaign against carbon and climate
change.

[***Deconstructing
Obama***](http://dsadc.org/deconstructing-obamas-climate-message-from-a-green-and-socialist-perspective/)
– *Andy Feeney* analyzes the administration’s mushy and contradictory
stances on climate change as drawn in Obama’s State of the Union speech.

[***Culture:***](http://dsadc.org/cinema-zero-dark-thirty-r-157-min/)
how *Zero Dark Thirty’*s ambiguity keeps a wide audience confused about
national security issues. *Dan Adkins* examines the Oscar-winning War on
Terror melodrama, as well as the new release, “NO,” a dramatization of
the plebescite that ousted Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet at the
ballot box, and the uncomfortably slick ad campaign that fueled the
surprise outcome.

[***Socialist
Takes**:*](http://dsadc.org/socialist-takeaways-and-short-takes/) briefs
on the local’s upcoming election, the never-ending Fiscal Cliff
(*Mosley*), the effort to expand sick leave in Maryland and other
Maryland legislative action (*Woodruff*),and  national DSA news items.

[*Betty Friedan and the building of a feminist political
infrastructure*](http://dsadc.org/betty-friedan-and-the-building-of-a-feminist-political-infrastructure/)

***The Washington Socialist*** &lt;&gt; **March 2013**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

In the mid-1960s one of my peers was reading Betty Friedan’s book *The
Feminine Mystique* in one of her university classes.  She kept quoting
ideas from it that had been in my own head for years, so I thought,
what’s the big deal?  It would be another 15 years before I would open
the cover of that book, which by then had run its celebrated course for
launching second wave feminism. I found Friedan’s work to be an
affirmation to women who wanted more than the confinement of a
traditional middle class heterosexual life which had come to mean
marriage, kids, and defined sex roles within hearth and home.

Friedan had identified the depth of modern bourgeois women’s boredom and
desire for more engagement with the world, and she helped lead them – us
– to a new vision and a renewed political vigor.

There’s a backstory here.

In the early ‘60s, my girlfriends and I would muse about what we would
all be doing in a few years, once high school graduation was behind us. 
They were looking for Mr. Wonderful and the traditional life that I
wanted to run far, far away from.  Our military families had gravitated
to the suburbs in the 1950s and we had grown up in the kind of
households that the participants in Friedan’s research had been so
unhappy with (though our suburbs were lower middle class, not the
educated elite ones Friedan knew).

Still, the women’s oppression that Friedan described was familiar to me,
and I wanted no part of it.  What I did not know till much later was
that she and I were propelled not just by what we were running *from*
but also running *toward* – the lure of radical ideas and dreams for a
world they might make possible.  In the midst of so many roiling social
movements in the years to come, my own feminist consciousness evolved
slowly and sometimes painfully as I figured out how to adopt leftist
feminist ways of being in a conventional society.  This remains a work
in progress even today.

I am intrigued by how easily commentators writing the obligatory pieces
commemorating the 50^th^ anniversary of the *Feminine Mystique* talk
about Betty Friedan’s Marxist and communist connections, her support for
laborers, and her work as a writer for the weekly paper for the
left-wing United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America.

Friedan tried to minimize her radical past after she gained prominence
as the founder of National Organization for Women (NOW) and made her
place in mainstream feminism for fear of alienating the very women she
wanted to mobilize politically.  *Truthout’*s Peter Dreier observes that
she, Bella Abzug and many of the other early second wave leaders had
distanced themselves from the left-wing affiliations that had nurtured
them.  The fact that they were also Jewish meant they and their families
had already experienced marginalization of more than one kind during the
McCarthy years and they didn’t want to tarnish their emerging leadership
in the 1960s.

We take the work (and I mean this in the true sense as labor) of Betty
Friedan and her generation of upstart women for granted today.  They
were tireless in their need to set things in motion. Friedan’s
organization NOW remains perhaps the longest-lived women’s political
action group in the history of the United States.  Though often labeled
a white middle class organization, NOW has worked for legislation and
social issues across five decades that benefit women across
socio-economic and racial categories – abortion rights, equal pay,
anti-violence legislation, parental leave, and my personal favorite
women’s media ownership, among others.  Today’s NOW reaches out to a
multicultural audience and young women in universities and other parts
of society.  NOW’s leaders collaborate with those in civil rights and
GLBT groups on issues of shared concern.

In her organizing moments, Friedan didn’t stop at starting NOW but went
on to found or co-found other feminist political action groups,
including National Abortion Rights Action League and National Women’s
Political Caucus.  She helped to construct the infrastructure of modern
women’s politics in the United States that laid nearly all of the legal
grounding that women stand on today.  She took controversial stands,
e.g., supporting Shirley Chisholm’s candidacy for president in 1971,
along with Gloria Steinem and other white feminists, as a way of
encouraging women across racial lines to run for high office.

Friedan was a complex leader.  She built so much but she also stirred
animosities along the way.  Who can forget the “lavender menace”
designation she put on lesbians in the early ‘70s when the emerging
anti-feminist backlash was accusing the women’s movement of being a
bunch of man-hating lesbians?  Friedan got her comeuppance at the
International Women’s Year convention in Houston in 1976 when thousands
of women, straight and gay, in the auditorium stood in solidarity by
releasing lavender balloons that said “We are everywhere!”  And, the
lesbian-baiting in mainstream feminism dissipated after that.  Friedan
herself mellowed in time.

When Betty Friedan was an old woman, she harkened back to her radical
socialist vision to write a column for *Newsweek.*  In it, she spoke of
“transcending all ‘identity politics’ – women, blacks, gays, the
disabled” to envision a new community.  Connecting women’s lives to the
broader political spectrum, she said:

We need to campaign – men and women, whites and blacks – for a shorter
work week, a higher minimum wage, an end to the war against social
welfare programs. ‘Women’s issues’ are symptoms of problems that affect
everyone.

Around 2000, I saw Betty Friedan speak to an auditorium of loving
followers, which resembled the collection of humanity she conjured up in
this quote, at Cornell University.  She was advancing in years and
beginning to sound a bit confused in her dialogue; I can’t even remember
her topic.  What sticks in my mind is how difficult it was that day to
watch this aging hero falter, something remindful of the process that
confronts all of us.  I remember sitting in that auditorium not wanting
to leave but rather thinking of how she began and what she imparted
along the way.  Women and leftists are still beholden to her work on our
behalf.

On the 50^th^ anniversary of the book that started so many things to
roll, I hang onto this knowledge.

[*Cinema: “Zero Dark Thirty” and
“NO”*](http://dsadc.org/cinema-zero-dark-thirty-r-157-min/)

Friday, March 1st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist*** **&lt;&gt; March 2013**

*By Daniel Adkins*

*Zero Dark Thirty* is a film about the decade-long hunt for Osama bin
Laden.  The film has been overshadowed by its coverage of waterboarding
by which the CIA may have obtained intelligence about his location. 
Even the CIA has objected to the waterboarding scene.  However, the real
focus of the film is the major role that women are playing in
intelligence gathering and operations, and for that, it is commendable. 
In U.S. military and paramilitary forces woman are making major strides
and are only treated differently in the draft.  Considering that most
jobs a hundred years ago were defined by gender, we are now nearing the
end of legal job segregation by gender.

The film is based on the real-life struggle of a female CIA intelligence
agent facing bureaucratic, political, terror, and intelligence obstacles
in the pursuit of Osama.  The protagonist of *Zero Dark Thirty* was
remarkable in her prolonged determination to find Osama bin Laden while
others found bureaucratic or political concerns limiting their
involvement in the search.  The film depicts intelligence operations as
an almost industrial process.  When the decade-long work of finding the
target has been done, then the national heroes of Seal Team Six appear.
 It appears killing Osama bin Laden was easier then finding him.

Another observation about the film would be that the search for bin
Laden would not have been possible without the extensive involvement of
people of color in the CIA and recruited to CIA operations.  This is
especially true of Pakistan where some locals form armed patrols to keep
Europeans out of their communities.  These realities were shown but not
emphasized. Exploring these diversities would make for a different film,
but one that is sorely need in the US as we face globalization.

It will be interesting to see if women have an impact on how and what
intelligence is achieved.  Will they make a better distinction between
what can be done and what should be done than their male counterparts? 
In 1953 the British MI-6 and the American CIA overturned the
democratically elected Iranian Prime Minister to replace him with the
dictatorship of the Shah in order to get more profitable control of
Iran’s oil.  This was a doable CIA project, but were private oil profits
a worthy goal?  Was it worth installing a dictator whose overthrow is
still screwing up the Mideast?  An important question is why have we
allowed US foreign policy to be run for private profit instead of
expanding democracy and development?

The example of British banking suggests that the involvement of women
can lead to wiser decisions.  A UK study of UK banks showed that the
more women there were in a bank’s leadership the less risky behavior and
losses happened in the Great Recession.  This might get us better
long-term thinking, but we will also need elected officials more focused
on peaceful and sustainable world development than on private profit.

*\`**NO*** **\* in Spanish with English subtitles \* (R, 110 min.)**

In 1988 Chilean dictator General Augusto Pinochet calls a plebiscite to
determine if the general would rule for another eight years.  Opposition
leaders persuade a young skate-boarding advertising developer
(fictional) to spearhead the campaign to vote NO.  The film *NO* is
inspired by the history of this plebiscite.

There are many twists and turns in this story.  When a campaign of
“Chile, happiness is coming – vote NO” is developed, many who have lost
friends, family, and comrades to the brutal Pinochet regime leave the
campaign, seeing it as disrespectful if not traitorous for not
mentioning those lost.  Many believe the poll is rigged — including the
campaign developer’s wife, who was just recently released from prison
for her political activism.

The NO vote wins partly because after 15 years of dictatorship, many
Chileans yearn for the happiness of a less- controlled society.  Not
really shown are the indigenous workers, the strong unions, strong
political parties, student organizations, human rights groups, and a
grass roots effort pushing voter registration to 92% of potential
voters.   Another factor was that many of the generals went along with
the recommendations of their foreign backers and accepted the result of
the plebiscite.  In the film the long diverse lines at the polls hint at
the nature of Chilean society, but the story is focused on just the
urban and educated of Chile.  Note: Ad agencies do not get 92% of the
voters registered; unions and parties do.

Remembering that the film is an art form to convey some sentiment of the
time is necessary to understand its limitations.  If you need a PR
primer on “how to overthrow dictators,” this is not the movie.

However, the film brings forth the challenge of advertising, polls, or
any modern communication used to sway public opinion.  Plato was
skeptical of democracy, reasonably so, because he sensed that “the many”
are easily misled.  If the US election of 2012 was an example, the
dearth of real policy discussion and the excess of targeted posturing
could lead one to think that Plato was right.  Political operatives
toward the end of the 2012 campaign advised against any use of
statistics because both sides had completely discredited themselves with
regard to numbers.

The manipulative use of psychology, sociology, statistics, and culture
in advertising suggest that the knowledge of one’s self and one’s
society is not easily achieved, but is necessary to understand the
present and to achieve social change.  Until that knowledge spreads more
throughout the society, we are likely to see more manipulation and less
direct and straightforward communication.  However this is a good movie
to see and to stimulate discussion of the use of media in campaigns.

[*Deconstructing Obama’s Climate Message From a Green (and Socialist)
Perspective*](http://dsadc.org/deconstructing-obamas-climate-message-from-a-green-and-socialist-perspective/)

Friday, March 1st, 2013

***The Washington Socialist*** &lt;&gt; **March 2013**\
*By Andy Feeney*

For democratic socialists who care about the environment – and for
countless American environmentalists who probably don’t care about
democratic socialism – President Obama’s approach to climate change in
his 2013 State of the Union Address offers a remarkable collection of
contradictions.

In a few well-chosen words, Obama on Feb. 12 cited “the overwhelming
judgment of science” in declaring that the U.S. “must do more to combat
climate change,” for the sake of both ourselves and our posterity, and
“before it’s too late.”  Yet at the same time, he called for climate
policy to advance “strong economic growth” that some environmentalists,
at least, believe is a driver of both climate change and general
environmental destruction.

The speech hailed striking advances in wind energy and solar energy
production under Obama’s watch, and called for more such advances in the
future.  Yet it likewise celebrated U.S. growth in the production of oil
and gas, both fossil fuels that obviously contribute to destructive
climate change.  Indeed, the president promised that his administration
will “keep cutting red tape and speeding up new oil and gas permits,”
which could accelerate the extraction and use of both of these fossil
fuels.

In calling for new federally subsidized research on new technologies in
order to “shift our cars and trucks off oil for good,” Obama proposed to
fund such research through a new Energy Security Trust funded from
royalties on oil and gas production on public lands – a plan similar to
one floated in the 1980s by then-Senator Bennett Johnson (D-LA), and
overwhelming opposed by environmental groups at the time. They saw it as
potentially hooking the renewable energy movement on addictive infusions
of money generated by the oil industry.

Also in the State of the Union address, Obama made a probably obligatory
reference to the desirability of Congress enacting a “bipartisan,
market-based solution to climate change” such as that championed a few
years ago by Joe Lieberman and John McCain.

And yet – maybe very significantly –  he said nothing at all in this
speech about coal, whether of the “clean coal” variety or otherwise.
National environmental groups strongly hope that his EPA will adopt and
implement new rules on CO2 emissions from coal-fired power plants that
will reduce national consumption of this especially dirty, especially
carbon-intensive fossil fuel.

The speech did not mention by name the proposed Keystone XL pipeline –
an item of bitter contention between Obama’s environmentalist supporters
and some of the labor unions backing him.  The president’s address also
said nothing about nuclear power, which the Heritage Foundation is
touting as a promising alternative to fossil fuel production and which
NASA climate scientist James Hansen has somewhat gingerly endorsed as
one of many possible alternatives to continued dependence on coal, oil
and natural gas.

And although some observers strongly expect Obama’s new Secretary of
State, former Senator John Kerry, to pursue climate-friendly policies
internationally, the State of the Union speech made no mention of global
climate policy negotiations that China, the U.S., and India – the
leading CO2 emitters of the world – have effectively stalemated by
failing to agree on which nations need to cut greenhouse gas emissions,
by how much, and by when.

Finally, Obama, except in his brief allusion to the “overwhelming
judgment of science,” said nothing about recent climate research that
warns of the likely inability of the world to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions enough to avoid a 2 degree Celsius rise in average global
temperatures by about 2040.  Such a 2 degree rise is what many
scientists consider a “tipping point” — beyond which melting Arctic sea
ice and methane releases from melting permafrost in Arctic latitudes may
put greenhouse warming on steroids, sharply accelerating it and perhaps
putting its control or its cessation beyond the powers of human
civilization.

It is something of a Marxist cliché that history develops through
contradictions\[C5\].  But both in his statements and in his silences,
Obama in his State of the Union remarks placed before the voters some
crucially important contradictions, and highlighted them in bold relief.

Can the mainstream American environmental movement and more radical
Green groups grasp only one pole of those contradictions, and by pushing
on them hard enough, achieve real progress in tackling the climate
challenge?  Arguably, this is the best or perhaps the only thing the
environmental groups can do legislatively for now.

Yet at the same time, Obama’s also speech seems to offer the fossil fuel
industry – with the possibly significant exception of the coal producers
– a chance to grasp the other pole of these contradictions, and to push
our civilization in precisely the opposite direction, towards
environmental disaster.

What this paradox in Obama’s climate rhetoric signifies, of course, is
that American society and the broad Democratic Party coalition that got
Obama reelected are both riven by our own, very powerful
contradictions.  Obama’s dazzlingly paradoxical formulation of energy
policy reflects some stunning and possibly fatal contradictions among
his supporters and those political and economic interests – including
capitalist business interests – that Obama probably needs to work with
to accomplish anything.

Are there any smart Marxists in DSA – or any perceptive, socially-minded
analysts in the various Green groups – who can unravel the
contradictions both in Obama’s energy rhetoric and the Democratic
coalition at large, so that progressives can decide the best way to move
forward on the climate issue?  If so, let’s hope they show the way
forward – and as Obama said it himself, “before it’s too late.”

[*DSA’s Green aspect*](http://dsadc.org/dsas-green-aspect/)

 **How Metro DC DSA Participated In the Keystone XL/Climate Rally – and
What are the Next Steps?**

***The Washington Socialist*** &lt;&gt; **March 2013**

*By Andy Feeney and Woody Woodruff *

On Feb. 17, the largest political rally on climate change in U.S.
history occurred on the National Mall.  Climate activists and opponents
of natural gas fracking traveleled to Washington from across the Eastern
US, the South and the Midwest as well as Canada to urge President Obama
to decide against completion of the proposed Keystone XL pipeline that
would bring oil from the tar sands of Alberta to ports along the U.S.
Gulf Coast.

Rally organizers claimed a turnout of at least 35,000 activists, with
some sponsors estimating the crowd at nearly 50,000.  Members of our
Metro DC Washington chapter of DSA constituted a relatively tiny
contingent of those bracing the ironically frigid weather weather and
handed out fliers to the assembled climate activists, and we like to
think we made a small contribution to voicing a “socialist” and also
commonsensical position on the climate challenge.  In this article, we’d
like to explain to other chapter members what we said and why.

For nearly a century or more within the western social democratic left,
to which DSA belongs, and even more so within the global Communist
movement that flourished for 70 years following the Bolshevik
Revolution, concern for nature and environmental sustainability was
distinctly eclipsed by the urgent need to advance the interests of the
industrial proletariat – as socialists understood it, of course – and to
protect the interests of the poor.

In both the social democratic parties of the West and even more so
within the Communist led governments of the Soviet bloc, the pursuit of
economic growth and the fight against poverty and injustice took
precedence over worries about pollution, much less protection of the
environment for its own sake.  Some socialists both within and outside
of DSA today may still feel this is the proper focus for the left. 
Indeed, the subject was debated vigorously at a recent Socialist Salon
on the climate issue, and a lively dialogue that began at the Salon is
continuing on an informal basis within our chapter today.

For those of us who supported the Feb. 17 rally on Keystone and climate
change, however, a new understanding of what Marxist philosophy and
Marxist economics say about humanity’s relation to nature provides a
framework justifying – if not mandating – socialist involvement in
environmental sustainability issues, noticeably including that of
climate change.

Historically, in the class-based competition for control of nature and
the class advantage that control could confer – the “means of
production,” after all, are deeply implicated in natural resources – it
was easy for all sides to forget that the natural world provides the
terrain of that struggle and the essentials of human existence, water,
air and soil. There is no winning the industrial or even post-industrial
struggle if the terrain is lost – or, in this case, destroyed by the
central materials and combatants of the struggle.

With corporate power currently holding unprecedented sway in the
globalized economy, the message is to knuckle under to the
“inevitability” of market forces in the pursuit of our lives and
aspirations. Our socialist stance, on the contrary, is that private
market forces are not the inevitable signal-caller of our personal and
family lives nor our political lives –  in a vigorous, truly democratic
polity.

But the conditions of struggle are narrowing, the time horizon
shortening. The secondary effects of capitalist behavior – based on
extraction and combustion – threaten our lives as individuals, workers
and families – and as a community.

DSA’s flier for the big Keystone XL protest Feb. 17 stressed the
absurdity of seeking to remedy the national jobs deficit with a project
that would degrade the climate and cost huge amounts for recovery from
the accelerating string of “natural” disasters that will almost
certainly follow the destructive example of Superstorm Sandy.

A subtext of our flier (available on our [*Meetup
page*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/) \[tab “more/files”\] unmasks the
strategy of fear and anxiety that underlies corporate propaganda on
issues like KXL. Only we, the corporations thunder, can provide good
jobs, so shut up about this climate stuff if you hope to see the
unemployment rate go down.

And we know that every concession of power and control to the corporate
power (yes, a deliberate echo of “the slave power”) means a
corresponding erosion of labor’s opportunity to act in an organized,
impactful way, rather than to be scattered in anxious compliance.

These are aspects of the struggle over climate change that we feel must
be emphasized in a socialist analysis. To climate activists at the KXL
rally, we said:

“**Why is this disastrously bad energy project even being considered by
the Obama administration** and some of its allies? Because the energy
companies that hope to profit from it are proposing to put money into
creating the relatively few decent-paying  **jobs** that many Americans
in the depressed construction trades have seen for years***.***

**“Why is the future course of U.S. energy development largely being
dictated by by the same corporations that have brought our nation to its
knees**, both environmentally and economically?  Because our formally
democratic government, which is supposed to champion the public
interest, is all too often in the hands of the corporate lobbyists who
also dominate fundraising for both major political parties.

“The odious Keystone XL project makes obvious the web of global
corporate influence that constrains democratically chosen public
investments in the public interest, and that has tilted U.S. government
policies into favoring and even subsidizing private investments
***against*** the public interest.

“As climate activists battle to stop the pipeline, we must tackle the
wider task of reversing the stranglehold of private capital on the
public’s consciousness and the government’s choices.”

**That stranglehold is accomplished through what Richard Grossman called
“fear at work” – an effective weapon for corporations and banks** and
their political servants, elected and otherwise, who are fighting to
maintain the carbon-based status quo.  Through the Tea Party, the
Republican Party and rightwing think tanks, the fossil fuel industry is
working to block progress on combating climate change not only by
spreading mistrust of science and government but by promoting fears of
job losses if Americans try to replace our carbon-based economy with a
sane and greener one.

But working Americans also fear **potential higher energy costs** that
the power companies are claiming would result from actually jettisoning
fossil fuels and adopting alternative energy sources.

“While corporations play on our economic fears,” our message said, “the
centuries-old, accelerating process of industrial growth under basically
capitalist auspices threatens to make catastrophic planetary warming
irreversible. As democratic socialists, we say **all progressive forces
have to fight back for public control of this dangerous moment.”**

And because economics is critically important to how most voters think,
climate activists must counter the economic “Fear at Work” campaign that
the fossil fuel advocates are deploying to keep our society captive to
their agenda.

Working families in the United States, those that are paying attention,
rightly fear the **violent, destructive storms, droughts and**
**wildfires** that already are accompanying climate change, even without
the added carbon-intensive tar sands development the Keystone pipeline
would facilitate.

As the Labor Network for Sustainability points out, these fears will be
more than fulfilled by the effects of KXL and other mega-energy projects
planned by the corporate power.

To counter Economic Fear, we said, climate activists must:

-   Support not a “carbon tax” that people have been told will cause
    higher consumer prices, but instead support what climate scientist
    James Hansen has called a “cap and dividend” plan, one that would
    tax carbon-based fuels at the source, then use the money to fund
    generous tax refunds for all Americans on a per capita basis.  We
    must work to insure that the majority will gain income – not lose it
    — from carbon curbs. Other labels include “fee and dividend.” A
    just-filed measure sponsored by Sens. Bernie Sanders and Barbara
    Boxer, the “Climate Protection Act of 2013” would divide the revenue
    more specifically, diverting about 20 percent to energy research and
    development, job retraining and residential weatherization. The
    balance would directly compensate consumers.

-   Join with construction unions in fighting for more funding of needed
    infrastructure repair and construction projects, especially green
    ones, so that construction workers can have decent-paying jobs that
    are environmentally sustainable.

-   Support pro-union legislation that promotes workplace organizing
    unconstrained by management threats of termination and makes union
    democracy essential. The decline of unions has coincided with the
    decline in all workers’ share of advances in productivity since
    1973, and the rise in corporate wealth and hegemony – hence their
    ability to blackmail labor and working people by withholding jobs
    funds from the public sector while dangling the climate-wrecking
    Keystone XL project as the only alternative for jobs.

-    Support President Obama and political progressives – and even
    political conservatives, if they cooperate – in promoting greater
    federal funding for public transit systems and renewable energy
    development, again with the objective of promoting “green” jobs.

-   Support the existing “Blue Green Alliance” of conservationists and
    labor unions in its work to promote green jobs, and support the
    Labor Network for Sustainability (LNS) as well.

-   Strenuously oppose any deficit-driven “Sequestration” deal that
    defunds needed social programs, thus increasing the financial stress
    on millions of Americans and pushing them towards supporting even
    dirty and destructive energy projects for economic reasons.

**“Climate-friendly alternative development can support the creation of
good, skilled jobs when managed by the public in its own interest – not
captured by corporations,”** our flier said.  “A key step towards such
development must include support for a **publicly managed jobs program**
to transition from carbon-based energy to alternative energy, but
without the disruptive job losses that workers rightly fear if
alternative energy development is left up to corporate and/or market
forces alone.”

Even under current conditions, one study shows job gains from
regulations that would phase out fossil-fuel energy sources. The study
“by Ceres and the Political Economy Research Institute of the University
of Massachusetts …examines the jobs effects of some of the new
regulations \[and\] far from being “job killers,” the new regulations
will create nearly 300,000 new jobs, especially skilled, high-pay jobs
for engineers, project managers, electricians, boilermakers,
pipefitters, millwrights, and iron workers,” says Jeremy Brecher, in a
piece from the Labor Network for Sustainability. “The regulations would
lead to net job increases of more than 120,000 job years in Illinois,
123,000 in Virginia, 113,000 in Tennessee, 76,000 in North Carolina, and
76,000 in Ohio,” Brecher continues.

Most such projections, however, have a transition period of four or more
years, during which huge disruption to jobs, institutions, families and
communities commonly take place.

The disruption to communities, in jobs, income, energy prices and other
social costs, can and should be publicly managed, as well.  As the Labor
Network for Sustainability’s Brecher article points out, an effective
model exists. The Base Closing and Realignment program (BRAC) has a
comprehensive approach to remedying the impacts of military base
closings on dependent communities. That model, ironically enough a
Pentagon product, can be applied in the cases of coastal communities
needing large-scale housing shifts, for instance, as well as drought
recovery in agricultural areas and many other instances of potential
disruption coming from the shift away from carbon-based energy and
toward alternative sources like wind (including offshore wind) and
distributed solar energy. Support programs for workers and their
families acquiring new skills for the green technologies that will
replace the carbon energy regime – not only educational support, but
living support – must be included.

**In the short run** the struggle is against “sequester” cutbacks in
social spending as well as backing public renewable energy jobs and a
“fee and dividend” plan as the first step toward freeing American
politics from the corporate politics of fear. After the Keystone XL
battle is won, there will be much more to do to restore public control
of resources and the health of the planet.

**Alternative energy will benefit, not burden, consumers**, if working
people get their say.  American democracy should guarantee us a voice in
what kind of energy is produced – and with what impacts on employment —
and by whom. And energy has become so central to our postmodern society
that putting that factor at the center of a social evolution will key
the devolution of corporate capitalism into a publicly managed resource,
not a top predator.

That is the essence of the socialist demand, and the path to a socialist
*society* – one in which public provision is natural and “inevitable” –
and unstigmatized –  and the contributions of the market publicly
managed, rather than uncontrolled and feared.

Be Sociable, Share!

[*Socialist Takeaways and Short
Takes*](http://dsadc.org/socialist-takeaways-and-short-takes/)

Friday, March 1st, 2013

 

***LOCAL ALERTS***

**DEMOCRACY IN DCDSA** –DC Metro DSA will have an election for a new
Steering Committee at the March meeting. If you want to run, attend. If
you want to have a say in who wins, attend and vote. The meeting is
Saturday, March 9 at 2:30 p.m. in the [*Cleveland Park library
branch*](http://dclibrary.org/clevelandpark), 3310 Connecticut Ave. NW.
The steering committee will meet at 1 p.m. in the same location.

**MARYLAND PROGRESSIVE SUMMIT** in Annapolis Monday, March 4 brings
together progressives and the progressive legislators they hope to
influence in a legislature dominated by pro-business– but often bendable
— Democrats. The
[*event*](http://salsa.wiredforchange.com/o/5206/p/salsa/event/common/public/?event_KEY=282115)
takes place in room 131 of the House office building, 6 Bladen St. in
Annapolis from 4:30 to 7.

***NATIONAL DSA NOTES***

**NEW LOOK FOR WEBSITE** – [*National DSA’s
website*](http://www.dsausa.org/) (dsausa.org) is showing off a new
appearance and more attractive (but still socialist!) layout. Some new
features include an environmental blog space and other blogs for
commissions and special projects. Check it out.

**“BALANCING ACT” EXPLAINED** – national DSA has posted a [*briefing
paper *](http://www.dsausa.org/support_the_balancing_act)on the
Congressional Progressive Caucus’s proposed “ Balancing Act” that would
raise revenues from the banksters and their cohorts to cover the
discretionary domestic cuts in the wacko sequestration scheme – and
more. It is at http://www.dsausa.org/support\_the\_balancing\_act

***ON THE LEFT…***

**FISCAL CLIFF LOOMS AGAIN** – As the *Washington Socialist* goes to
press, it looks likely that the United States will fall off the “fiscal
cliff” on March 1, two months after President Obama signed a temporary
postponement of the original “cliff” date.  The cuts are the result of a
law signed in 2011 that was intended to pressure Congress into coming up
with a plan to reduce the deficit in order to avoid draconian mandatory
cuts – but Congress, true to form, never reached an agreement.  The bill
was the work of right-wing deficit hawks in Congress, for whom cutting
taxes for the wealthy is more important than America’s economic health. 
But President Obama and some congressional Democrats deserve a share of
the blame for agreeing to the legislation that set this doomsday machine
in motion.  If no action is taken, the \$85 billion in automatic cuts
will stop the economic recovery in its tracks and shift it into reverse
while ravaging vital programs such as Head Start, mental health
services, public safety and job training.  The [*American Federal of
Government Employees*](http://www.afge.org/?page=TheyCutYouPay) and
[*Americans for Tax Fairness*](http://www.americansfortaxfairness.org/)
are among the progressive organizations pointing out the recklessness
and absurdity of elevating deficit-cutting above all other national
priorities.  DSA members should check [*Metro-DC DSA’s Meetup
site*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA) for rallies and other actions to
protest the cuts that will take place in the absence of an 11^th^-hour
rescue. – *Bill Mosley*

 

**PAID SICK LEAVE BILL GRINDS THROUGH MD LEGISLATIVE PROCESS**

Advocates for workers and families are getting behind a Maryland bill
providing paid sick leave to the 40 percent  (or about 700,000) Maryland
workers who currently have none.

At legislative hearings before House and Senate committees Feb. 27,
members heard testimony about the choice between going to work sick to
cover bills and taking an unpaid day off. One low-paid restaurant server
said that missing a day amounted to a car payment; missing a weekend was
a mortgage payment. Others spoke of the conflict between caring for a
sick child and getting a day’s pay; one day-care operator said children
frequently arrived sick because their mothers couldn’t afford to miss a
day of work.

The growing cohort of part-time workers, the Bureau of Labor Statistics
reports, is harder hit still – only 23 percent of part-time workers have
paid sick leave.

The bill, crossfiled in House and Senate, provides for workers to earn a
hour of sick time for every thirty hours of work, up to a cap of 56
hours per year. Del. John Olszewski, the lead House sponsor, said it was
deliberately flexible to reduce the administrative burden on small
business.

The House bill
[*(SB0735)*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frmMain.aspx?id=hb0735&stab=01&pid=billpage&tab=subject3&ys=2013RS)
has nearly thirty co-sponsors, including a dozen from the DC suburban
counties.  The Senate version (SB 0698) is sponsored by three senators
from the DC suburbs – two from Montgomery and one from Prince George’s.

The House Economic Matters committee, often cited as a venue where
progressive bills “go to die,” gave a respectful hearing to the bill
Feb. 27 while the gallery was packed with proponents, including many who
testified. Expert testimony from Melissa Broome of the [*Job
Opportunities Task
Force*](http://www.jotf.org/Home/tabid/36/Default.aspx) led off. She
announced the formation of Working Matters, an 84-member coalition of
organizations pointed directly at support for paid sick leave.

A Republican House committee member did counter with selected anecdotes
from [*a *Wall Street Journal* article
*](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323864304578318530400767940.html)Feb.
23 that indicated some businesses in Connecticut, which began requiring
sick leave last year, found it a burden. The *Journal* article, however,
also noted some in Connecticut who welcomed it, and added that besides
Maryland, Washington state and Massachusetts among states and cities
including New York were in the process of legislating sick leave. The
national average of workers without sick leave is 39 percent. Sen. Tom
Harkin will introduce national sick leave coverage this spring, an
effort backed by the White House and vociferously by Bill Clinton, the
*Journal* article noted.

The public health impact of paid sick leave was stressed by many in a
year of worse-than-average flu. Andy Shallal, owner of Busboys and Poets
restaurants, testified in favor of the House bill while noting the
benefits that he gained from providing it already – less turnover,
higher employee morale and less illness. He pointed out, as does ROC,
that giving ill food handlers the option to stay home without losing a
day’s pay was a critical public health issue.

Republicans on the House committee argued that the costs of paid sick
leave would be a disincentive to employers wondering whether to locate
in Maryland or Virginia. Proponents point out the public advantages of
stable workplaces and workpaths. In the Senate hearing, bill sponsor
Sen. Rob Garagiola said mitigating amendments are likely to satisfy
employers’ complaints, but “there needs to be a balance of the need of
the employees compared to the needs of the employers.”

The question of whether paid sick days would increase the amount of time
taken off is addressed in the fiscal note attached to the bill. It
reports that “Data from the 2008 National Health Interview Survey
revealed that, when workers are limited to a maximum of 5 days of work
loss, workers with paid sick days miss an average of 1.6 days annually
for illness and injury, excluding maternity leave, compared with 1.4
days for those without paid sick days.”

As the *Washington Socialist* March issue went to press Feb. 28, both
bills were still alive and untouched in their respective chambers and
advocates were optimistic that Maryland would set a leadership tone on
the growing national issue. – *Woody Woodruff*

**OFFSHORE WIND GETS STRONGER** – the almost sure passage of a
(diminished) offshore wind power project undertaken by Maryland and
private capital passed not only the full House of Delegates but its
bigger hurdle in the Senate Finance Committee. Thanks to a reshuffling
of committee members by the senate president, the bill emerged Feb. 25
at the long end of a 7-4 committee vote to go on to the Senate floor.
The finance panel had been the graveyard of offshore wind bills in the
two years previous.

The bill requires a significant percentage of the state’s power to come
from offshore wind after the first turbines are to come online offshore
from Ocean City in 2017. Costs will be recouped, in part, from a
surcharge on utility bills, capped at \$1.50 a month for residential
customers and 1.5 percent for business customers.

The amount of offshore “acreage” dedicated to turbines is well less than
environmental groups had hoped, and now the goal will be to get future
enlargement of the turbine field and hence the production, as well as to
seek a public power authority component in the project as it evolves. –
*Woody Woodruff*

[*“With Liberty and Justice for
All”*](http://dsadc.org/with-liberty-and-justice-for-all/)

***The Washington Socialist*** &lt;&gt; **March 2013**\
*By Kurt Stand*\
“The shepherd drives the wolf from the sheep’s throat, for which the
sheep thanks the shepherd, as a liberator, while the wolf denounces him
for the same act as the destroyer of liberty, especially as the sheep
was a black one.  Plainly the sheep and wolf are not agreed upon a
definition of the word liberty; and precisely the same difference
prevails today among human creatures. …”

Too often arguments about the nature of liberty, of freedom, take place
in a vacuum, ignoring how the actual relationships between people – who
has or does not have power – determines how such “liberty” is
experienced.  The above passage was spoken by Abraham Lincoln to
describe the conflict at the core of the Civil War – and can similarly
be used to address divides which still plague our society, though rarely
addressed so honestly in public discourse.  The right-wing and racist
response to Obama’s election, the fear that it means a loss of freedom,
was and is driven by the fear of the equality called forth by his
Inaugural Address reference to “Seneca Falls, Selma and Stonewall.”

Under the surface, that fear was fueled too by the fact that corporate
power itself rests on numerous layers of inequality, inequality which is
rationalized on the premise that any structural attempt to guarantee
equality would result in a loss of “liberty.”  Capture of that word has
been the foundation of neo-liberal ideology and contributes to its
appeal and seeming legitimacy.  Even many who challenge the more extreme
version of the neo-liberal outlook as embodied by the practices and
policies of right-wing Republicanism accept too much of its underlying
premises.

It is an acceptance which ignores the reality that certain forms of
injustice are promoted because they benefit some at the expense of
others, that those polices flow not from superior reasoning or logic,
but from superior power.

It is worth recalling that the Civil War took place at a moment when the
meaning of the American Revolution was still a subject to debate;
Lincoln’s words spoken at a time when an alternative path of development
flowing from the American Revolution still seemed within grasp.  Again,
addressing a conflict rooted in ways of understanding what those choices
were, he said:\
“The world has never had a good definition of the word liberty, and the
American people, just now are in want of one.  We all declare for
liberty; but in using the same word we do not mean the same thing.  With
some the word liberty may mean for each man to do as he pleases with
himself, and the product of his labor; while with others the same word
may mean for some men to do as they please with other men, and the
product of other men’s labor.  Here are two, not only different, but
incompatible things, called by the same name, liberty.  And it follows
that each of the things is, by the respective parties, called by two
different and incompatible names – liberty and tyranny.”

How far public discourse has moved from such considerations can be seen
in a nutshell by four brief items noted without commentary in the
Washington Post’s  Sunday Feb. 17 business section:\
a) Coca Cola’s 4th quarter profits were up 13%.\
b) Pepsi Cola’s net income rose 17% in that same quarter, with their
divedends up 5.6% and stock shares up 1%.\
c) Lemann’s 3G Capital – which had previously acquired Burger King and
helped create the Anheuser Busch InBev beer empire – joined with Warren
Buffet’s Berkshire Hathaway in purchasing Heinz.  The deal was valued at
\$23 billion.\
d)  A Department of Labor Survey revealed that 40 % of America’s
workforce isn’t covered under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act. 
Translated into English, that means that 4 out of 10 workers can be
fired if they take an unpaid day off from work to deal with a health
emergency.

These are facts  that speak to a connection unmentioned – the increased
profits of some industries and companies is directly tied to the low
wages, insecure working conditions and lack of rights for workers who
create those profits.  Chambers of Commerce ignore that interdependence,
as does Tea Party demagoguery, as does mainstream economics.  The
liberty so often proclaimed is a liberty that denies the common good,
for it is a liberty that privileges one group of the population over
others.   It is masking the reality that it is workers, not corporate
presidents, who may lose their job for taking a day off when ill; it is
an inequality reflected in the reality that most of those workers who
are denied the benefits of the Family and Medical Leave Act are women,
are immigrants, are African Americans.

Overcoming those facts goes to the heart of the demands of the
Restaurant Opportunities Center (ROC) – an organization founded in 1991
to fight for better pay and working conditions for low-wage, unorganized
restaurant workers – for passage of the Healthy Families Act which would
compel employers to grant some paid sick days off to employees,
including restaurant workers, 90% of whom currently have no paid off
days.  Additionally, ROC is leading a campaign to increase the \$2.13
minimum wage for tipped workers, an amount unchanged since 1991. 
Alongside that, the labor movement locally and nationally is leading a
campaign to increase the general minimum wage for all workers.  If
successful these measures of social justice would allow those workers
more freedom by compelling employers to provide what they would rather
deny.

By contrast, the attempt to impose austerity as a solution to our
economic woes despite the suffering that would result is an attempt to
increase the freedom of the wealthy by compelling the majority to work
for less.  The language of shared sacrifice often used to justify
cutting the deficit obscures that relationship; it can only help in the
struggle against the imposition of austerity to make visible the
difference in interests that has been hidden.  That is not a question of
language, it is a question of power.  President Obama in his State of
Union signaled his support for an increased federal minimum wage, for
expansive social spending.  But as seen in the past, there is a long
rocky road between what is projected and what actually takes place – a
road that can only be traversed when popular movements develop political
strength able to counter the political strength of the already
powerful.\
To do so those movements need to build on the progressive policies
opened up by Obama, but need equally to take a critical approach to the
limitations of his compromises.  This brings us back to Lincoln.  The
recent movie about him gives an accurate picture of the struggle for
passage of the 13th Amendment, of his ability to combine compromise with
principle in order to achieve a critical step toward making US society
live up to the promises of the Declaration of Independence.

Yet the film left out the voices of those in the trenches of the social
struggles of the day, of those who did the work of abolition, for whom
the goal of ending slavery was a step toward full and complete
equality.  The kind of movement able to support critical even if limited
goals at the same time as continuing agitation and organizing for more
far-reaching aims provided the basis that made the truly radical victory
of ending slavery through the mechanism of legislative compromise
possible.  A sense of how that was viewed can be glimpsed in the
conclusion of a “Negro Suffrage Convention,” held in New York in 1858,
which called for support of the then new Republican Party but also
resolved “That in so doing, we do not for a moment endorse all the
political tenets of that party, we are Radical Abolitionists, and shall
ever remain so.”

Today’s particular battles for medical leave and minimum wage increases
that might help people move out of poverty, the general battle against
economic austerity need to be fully joined for they can extend
meaningful rights using the possibilities opened up by the Obama
Administration in the here and now.

These will be strengthened, however, if they press deeper and further
and call into question a system where a few profit at the expense of
many.  Just as the Civil War and the struggle to end slavery were about
policies and practices that defined opposing notions of liberty, just as
the labor movements origins were built on opposing employers’ concept of
right, so today movements for necessary measures of justice can achieve
gains at the moment while fighting for a more radical vision — a vision
rooted in the understanding that a genuine democracy connects freedom
and equality; a connection which goes to the heart of socialism.

Be Sociable, Share!
