***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the January 2013 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*‘A free world-class education for anyone
anywhere’*](http://dsadc.org/a-free-world-class-education-for-anyone-anywhere/)

Monday, January 7th, 2013

**By Daniel Adkins**

***The Washington Socialist*, January 2013**

An interesting step forward in education occurred when hedge fund
analyst Salman Khan turned from the dark side to tutor his cousin Nadia
in math long-distance.  The tutoring spread to other young members of
his family, and evolved into YouTube lessons.  Once on YouTube, his
audience expanded to millions world-wide. Khan was able to quit his job
and create an educational nonprofit that became subsidized by the Gates
family, Google, and many individuals.  The aim is to develop software
and course material on many subjects including mathematics, science,
computer science, finance, economics, history, humanities, and test
preparation.  He has recently released a book on his visionary mission.

Khan Academy’s innovative approach, part of a broader online education
movement, has the potential to be a tool against inequality, especially
the kind perpetuated by educational attainment.

The online education technique he developed has the students doing
homework in the classroom (or home) by themselves and getting the
teacher’s tutoring as needed.  This actually increases the
teacher-student contact while allowing the student to repeat sections on
his own until mastered.  The teacher has a software “dashboard” to
monitor the progress of each student, including the ones needing help. 
This method has allowed “slower” students to master subject matter and
become “A” students.   These techniques are being used by public schools
in California, and web-based students around the world.  When I was in
college, I would have loved to have access to these techniques when
struggling with math.  It would have been extra work but I would have
completely mastered the subjects.

The Khan Academy’s mission statement is “A free world-class education
for anyone anywhere.” This puts it firmly in the midst of the MOOC
(massive online open courses) phenomenon, in which university and other
courses are put online for free consumption. Much of the discussion in
the MOOC world is about how to enable students to get the most out of
the course by self-pacing.

Interviewed last month in the *Stanford Daily*, Khan said “I think that
the general narrative is that people learn when it’s active and when
it’s at their own pace…as opposed to passive, and at somebody else’s
pace.”  Khan’s material is brief and task-oriented, where many MOOCs are
aligned with the way the world is divided up into a semester-length
curriculum by college courses. The recent MOOC overview in *The New York
Times* education section notes that “Thanks to [*Khan
Academy*](http://www.khanacademy.org/)’s free archive of snappy
instructional videos, MOOC makers have gotten the memo on the benefit of
brevity: 8 to 12 minutes is typical.” Interactivity and self-paced
quizzes are frequent.

The Khan Academy does not give degrees, something that can be
problematic for those seeking jobs that require one.  It does not
distinguish a student by his or her purpose – if you become a hedge fund
analyst or make ICBMs for North Korea, or become a socialist organizer. 
It holds the potential to give poor and other students all around the
world a leg up in understanding math and other subjects and avoiding the
cost of repeating classes.  The less-advantaged will become more
competitive. But how that education is used depends on the social
organization of their countries and the individual’s own personal goals.

Khan’s innovation, in the context of the MOOC surge, obviously has
promise as a tool to reduce inequality.

Khan Academy is available at, what else,
[*https://www.khanacademy.org/*](https://www.khanacademy.org/)

For fun see the history class on communism and the ones on capitalism. 
Khan himself is a capitalist by all appearances but does set the ground
work for a great discussion.  An example is that he credits socialism
with redistributing wealth.  That is true but most Americans are waking
up to the reality that capitalism seeks to and has redistributed US and
the world’s wealth to the 1%, leaving the rest of us struggling.

DSA and its perspectives should get into this game too.

The book: [***The One World Schoolhouse: Education
Reimagined***](http://www.amazon.com/One-World-Schoolhouse-Education-Reimagined/dp/1455508381/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1354664193&sr=1-1&keywords=khan+academy)
by Salman Khan (Oct 2, 2012)

The *Stanford Daily’s* two-part series of interviews with Khan (who’s
based in Mountain View, Calif.) begins at
[*http://www.stanforddaily.com/2012/12/05/salman-khan-and-the-reinvention-of-college/*](http://www.stanforddaily.com/2012/12/05/salman-khan-and-the-reinvention-of-college/)

A broader recent account of the MOOC phenomenon is at
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/04/education/edlife/massive-open-online-courses-are-multiplying-at-a-rapid-pace.html?pagewanted=all&\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/04/education/edlife/massive-open-online-courses-are-multiplying-at-a-rapid-pace.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0)

**Bob Auerbach, Socialist: 1919-2012**

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt; January 2013***

*By Lucy Duff and Woody Woodruff*

Bob Auerbach, a longtime socialist and activist in Prince George’s
County who was among founders of the state’s Green Party, died Dec. 12
after being struck by a car while crossing a street in Greenbelt. He was
two days short of his 93^rd^ birthday.

Bob ran for the U.S. House three times, including in the 2012 election,
when he ran as a Green Party candidate against Steny Hoyer in the 5^th^
District of Maryland. He was active in pushing for changes in state law
to reduce the exclusionist legal hegemony of the two major parties.

The *Washington Post*’s obituary reported that Bob “was a lead plaintiff
in a 2003 lawsuit charging the state with discriminating against
alternative political parties. Maryland’s highest court, the Court of
Appeals, ruled that it was unconstitutional to require third parties to
submit two separate petitions to have a spot on the ballot.” He chaired
the People’s Party in 1972 when its presidential candidate was Dr.
Benjamin Spock.

His demeanor was so unassuming that folks, even comrades, often
underestimated his determination and his ability to take the long view
on social change and stick with it. A longtime vegan, he was active in
animal rights campaigns and declined to use animal-based products like
leather. His low-impact  lifestyle included extensive use of mass
transit.

Bob’s long life on the left included joining the War Resister’s League
in 1939 and serving as a marshal at the 1963 March on Washington that
foregrounded Martin Luther King Jr.’s great speech. He joined YPSL (the
Young People’s Socialist League) in the 1940s and the Socialist Party in
1952.  He moved to the Washington area in 1961, and as a leader in the
local chapter of the SP made sure May Day was celebrated annually – no
matter what day of the week it fell on.

Bob, according to the *Post* obituary, was “born in 1919, in New York
City. He received a bachelor’s degree in political science from New York
University in 1948 and a master’s degree in library science in 1956 from
Peabody College, now part of Vanderbilt University in Nashville.” He
worked as a librarian for many years, including at the Department of
Housing and Urban Development and the University of the District of
Columbia.

A major project, nearly finished but still unpublished at his death, was
a book-length scholarly compendium of quotations about peace and
pacificism. Its sources ranged from ancient to contemporary and from
leaders of all religions to many military figures. Friends who worked
with him on the project are discussing how to complete it, now that he
won’t be coming up with those one or two more quotations that just have
to be included.

[*Book Review: We’re Still the ‘Belly of the
Beast’*](http://dsadc.org/book-review-were-still-the-belly-of-the-beast/)

Two Canadian Leftists Offer a Fresh Look

At the Economic Americanization of the World

***The Washington Socialist*** &lt;&gt; **January 2013**

** ***By Andy Feeney*

*The Making of Global Capitalism:  The Political Economy of American
Empire,* by Leo Panitch and Sam Gindin.

Like the Sherlock Holmes story involving the clue of “the dog that
didn’t bark in the night,” the last four years of global economic crisis
have featured some striking absences – some things that many people
expected to happen, that surprisingly didn’t.

Many economists agree that the U.S. financial meltdown that struck
shortly before Barack Obama’s election to the presidency in 2008 soon
triggered the worst economic crisis in global capitalism since the Great
Depression of the 1930s.  Yet while the Great Depression created a
political crisis in Germany that brought the Nazi Party to power, the
financial meltdown of 2008 and the “great recession” that followed have
so far failed to generate a rightwing authoritarian takeover in any
leading capitalist country.

The 1929 stock market crash and the Great Depression that followed also
spurred the U.S. Congress to pass the notoriously protectionist
Smoot-Hawley Tariff, which soon inspired other capitalist powers to
adopt extreme tariffs of their own – causing a drastic and ruinous
contraction of world trade.  Yet since 2008, the leading capitalist
governments of Europe, North America and Japan and even the aggressively
interventionist government of China have largely tried to coordinate
their efforts to stabilize the world economy, although some of their
efforts at cooperation have been flawed

During the global economic crisis of the 1930s, again,
hyper-nationalistic governments in Japan, Germany and Italy pushed the
world towards war – seemingly validating Lenin’s earlier argument that
the “highest stage of capitalism” is imperialism, and that it almost
inevitably produces war. Yet fortunately, the global economic crisis of
2008-2013 has so far failed to generate serious military competition
among leading capitalist nations, and no new global war seems imminent..

Why hasn’t the dog barked in the night?  Why is it that while the 2008
financial crash originated in the United States, and while the US
Treasury has racked up huge new levels of debt since 2008 while the
Federal Reserve Board has been inflating the U.S. dollar, foreign
investors and foreign governments are not shunning U.S. Treasury bonds –
as many conservative economists expected –   but are eagerly buying our
bonds instead?

According to Canadian labor economists Leo Panitch, long-time editor of
*The Socialist Register*, and Sam Gindin, former research director of
the Canadian Auto Workers union, the answer is that the U.S. government
since the 1930s has successfully worked along with the New York
financial sector to stabilize, regulate and dramatically expand the
scope of global capitalism as a whole.

To a degree often unappreciated by the American left, Panitch and Gindin
write, a largely informal American empire – resting partly on the global
reach of U.S. corporations, but also encompassing a strong U.S. state
sector practicing extensive financial and economic regulation – has
become critical to the functioning of the entire global capitalist
system.

Rather than simply serving the narrow interests of U.S. business in
expanding American export markets and foreign investment outlets, or
even access to important resources like oil, the informal empire has
established itself as the best protector of capitalist enterprises
everywhere – even those that are potential rivals to American firms.

Citing former Secretary of State Madeline Albright’s words, Panitch and
Gindin suggest that in terms of global capitalist stability, the United
States has in fact become the “indispensable nation,” so much so that
even such potentially serious rivals as the French, the Japanese and the
Chinese are relying on Washington to lead the way out of the current
global slump.

In reaching this conclusion, Panitch and Gindin show some striking
disagreements with Lenin’s analysis in *Imperialism: The Highest Stage
of Capitalism*, and they also partly reject the argument made by the
American revisionist historian William Appleman Williams, in *The
Tragedy of American Diplomacy,* about American empire primarily arising
in response to U.S. business interests seeking foreign markets as a
supposed cure for domestic market gluts.

Their analysis is likely to be controversial among many supporters of
European social democracy and American “New Deal” liberalism, too.

Essentially, Panitch and Gindin see New Deal liberalism, higher working
class incomes and living standards, and the “social contract” that
prevailed between American labor unions and American corporations in the
immediate postwar period as constituting the main way in which global
capitalism recuperated its strength and expanded globally in the
aftermath of the 1930s Depression and World War II.

Rather than seeking out foreign markets and foreign investment outlets
in the colonial world to compensate for glutted markets or working class
“underconsumption” at home, they believe, global capitalism under
American leadership relied on rising working class living standards in
the postwar period to provide the capitalists with the markets and the
investment opportunities they needed.

Panitch and Gindin therefore consider New Deal liberalism in the United
States and the reforms won by European social democracy to be key
elements in an ultimately capitalist and globalist project.

Social democracy and New Deal liberalism both helped to resolve
the explosive economic and political tensions of capitalism that had
severely threatened the system in the 1930s, according to the book. 
Yet they did so not by empowering the workers or feeding their
militancy, but by encouraging working-class consumerism, working class
home ownership supported by effective financial regulation and growing
levels of consumer debt, and similar reforms that made it more
easier for western workers — at least until recent decades — to live in
a mixed-market economy, rather than battling corporations for control
of it.

Rather than trying to use the process of economic globalization to
escape entirely from government regulation in the developed countries,
Panitch and Gindin add, large multinational corporations (MNCs) today
are still relying heavily on government protection to stabilize the
global investment and production system as a whole.  Admittedly, today’s
MNC’s may rely on many states for protection, not just one.  Yet they
are far from trying to hollow out the state or destroy its power
entirely, for such power remains central to the corporations’
profitability, if not their survival.

[*DC Proposal to “Ban the Box” for Ex-Inmates Deserves Another
Look*](http://dsadc.org/dc-proposal-to-ban-the-box-for-ex-inmates-deserves-another-look/)

Monday, January 7th, 2013

** *The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2013**

*By Bill Mosley*

Just before Christmas, the DC Council put a lump of coal in the
stockings of ex-convicts trying to get their lives in order.  The
Council rejected a bill introduced by Councilmember Marion Barry that
would bar employers from asking job seekers about past criminal
convictions during the application process.  The proposal had gathered
more media attention for Barry’s parliamentary maneuvers to get the bill
before the Council, and for Council Chair Phil Mendelson’s equally
determined opposition, than for the merits of the issue.

But first, some background.  Approximately 65 million Americans have had
some sort of brush with the law that has left them with a criminal
record.   [*A disproportionate percentage is made up of persons of
color*](http://www.prisonpolicy.org/graphs/raceinc.html) – about 62
percent of incarcerated persons are African American and 27 percent are
Latino – with arrests heavily weighted to men in their late teens or
early twenties.  Many of them are the products of poor neighborhoods and
troubled families where disincentives to antisocial behavior are weak or
missing, and where the full weight of the criminal justice system tends
to fall on even minor transgressions.   [*If current trends
continue*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/a-missed-opportunity-to-help-ex-offenders/2012/12/21/5395270c-4af6-11e2-9a42-d1ce6d0ed278_story.html),
three out of four young African American men in DC are likely to be
incarcerated at some time.  For these young men, even a minor crime can
come with a life sentence of near-unemployability, since most job
applications ask whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
crime.  Those who check the “yes” box often find their resume landing in
the trash.

Especially in the United States – which [*incarcerates more than seven
million people, more than any other
country*](http://www.naturalnews.com/021290_prison_system_incarceration.html)
both in absolute numbers (even more than China) and as a percentage of
the population  — ensuring that former prisoners can obtain gainful
employment after release is a critical part of rehabilitation.  To be
sure, the U.S. criminal justice system pays little more than lip service
to rehabilitation while focusing on removing prisoners from society and
meting out punishment.  But the specter of thousands of ex-convicts
being dumped on the streets each year, many of them driven back to crime
by lack of meaningful employment opportunities, should give everyone
pause – especially given the fact that [*of all persons arrested for
alleged crimes, half of them have prior
convictions.*](http://www.convictcriminology.org/pdf/roots.pdf)

With this in mind, starting in the late 1990s, advocates for
ex-prisoners began advocating restrictions on employers’ ability to ask
about the past criminal convictions of job seekers.  Under “ban-the-box”
proposals, employers would be allowed to ask about criminal records only
after an interview – and deny employment only if the conviction
indicated the applicant would be unsuitable for the specific job.   For
instance, an embezzler could be denied a job handling money, and a child
molester could be kept out of a daycare center.  But no one could be
routinely denied employment for, say, a teenage drug-possession rap.

The first statewide ban-the-box law was passed in
[*Hawaii*](http://www.nelp.org/page/-/SCLP/ModelStateHiringInitiatives.pdf?nocdn=1)
in 1998, banning both public and private employers from asking about an
applicant’s criminal record until after being offered employment.  The
idea spread, if not exactly like wildfire; since then seven other states
have adopted similar measures – although only one state, Massachusetts,
goes as far as Hawaii in banning discrimination by both public and
private employers; the laws of the other states (California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Minnesota, Rhode Island and New Mexico) apply only to
hiring by state agencies.  In addition, [*over 40 cities around the
country*](http://www.nelp.org/page/-/SCLP/2011/CityandCountyHiringInitiatives.pdf?nocdn=1),
including Baltimore, have passed their own municipal versions of the
law.  Most “ban the box” for only city hiring or for vendors who do
business with the city, but a few – including Philadelphia and Newark,
N.J. – also cover private employers in their bans.

The District of Columbia is the only Washington-region government to
pass a ban-the-box law.  Its 2010 measure applied only to hiring by the
DC government.  Under Barry’s proposal, the ban would have been extended
to private employers as well.

Cynics have said Barry’s sympathy for ex-convicts stem from his own
celebrated run-ins with the law.  But more likely, he draws his
inspiration from his long career as an elected official serving mostly
minority constituents, many of them suffering under employment
discrimination due to their criminal records – including Barry’s current
constituents in Ward 8, with its high concentration of poverty and
overwhelmingly African American population.  His activism, prior to
being in elected office, in SNCC and the Free DC movement, also
undoubtedly inform his understanding of discrimination against
ex-convicts as a civil rights issue.

It is understandable that many employers might believe it is in their
interest to avoid hiring ex-convicts.  But it also is in the interest of
society at large to reintegrate ex-convicts into society, and to stop
adding to the large underclass of former prisoners with minimal
prospects of earning an honest living.

Studies are lacking on the impact of ban-the-box laws on recidivism. 
However, when one looks at [*crime trends in
Hawaii*](http://www.disastercenter.com/crime/hicrime.htm), the state
with the longest experience with these laws, it’s notable that overall
crime rates and the rate of property crime have declined dramatically –
by 32.0 and 34.4 percent, respectively – since the law was passed in
1998, compared to 
[*nationwide*](http://www.disastercenter.com/crime/uscrime.htm) declines
of 28.6 percent in overall crime and a 28.2 percent in property crimes. 
Crimes against property – burglary, larceny and vehicle theft – are what
one might expect less of if ex-convicts are able to find work in the
legal economy.  (Interestingly, Hawaii’s rate of violent crime has risen
over that period, while that of the United States as a whole has
dropped).

Of course, helping ex-convicts find legal employment should be only part
of the reform of the prison-industrial complex.  Other problems abound: 
the lack of meaningful training and rehabilitation opportunities in
prison, the trend toward prison privatization (which provides a
financial incentive for prison-owning corporations to lobby for more
incarceration and harsher sentences) and the tendency of government to
view low-income communities of color as largely law-enforcement problems
rather than people in need of jobs, education, health care, better
housing and other services that affluent Americans take for granted. 
Nevertheless, ban-the-box statutes could provide a first step toward
breaking the stranglehold of past mistakes on millions of Americans’
future life prospects.  The Council should take a fresh look at a
comprehensive ban-the-box bill in the new year.

[*DC-area action on GMO foods, labeling on
tap*](http://dsadc.org/dc-area-action-on-gmo-foods-labeling-on-tap/)

Monday, January 7th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2013**

** ***By Andy Feeney*

If you eat food products containing corn, soybeans or canola grown in
the United States, there is a good chance you’re consuming food affected
in some way by commercial genetic engineering.  If you wear clothing
made from American-grown cotton, you also have more than a 50% chance of
being a consumer of fibers from plants whose DNA has been artificially
modified.  What’s more, there’s a good chance the genetically modified
food and fiber you’re consuming is not clearly labeled, so that you may
be purchasing it without knowing.

Out of growing concern over this situation – and in many cases, out of
outrage – a growing number of environmentally-minded activists are
employing political, legal, and direct action strategies to put pressure
on Monsanto, a leading promoter of genetically engineered crop plants in
the US and the world and a bullying presence in the electoral arena and
the courts to enforce its control of its major patents and products.

For democratic socialists in the metro Washington DC area who want to
join the fight against Monsanto and genetically modified food, several
opportunities for activism invite your participation over the new few
months.

But would-be activists should be warned:  the scientific and legal
issues at stake are complex, and some factual issues in question are
bitterly disputed.  To paraphrase the title of a famous John Steinbeck
novel about a Communist-led farm workers strike in the 1930s, it may be
that in some cases, the activists and company are engaged “In Dubious
Battle,” a battle that may not appeal to the finicky.

Among the organizations leading the anti-Monsanto, anti-genetic
engineering fight are the Organic Consumers Association or OCA, and the
direct action group “Occupy Monsanto.” Both groups were represented at a
January 3 meeting, held at the Friends Meeting House in Washington, on
Monsanto and genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in food.

A key strategy of OCA in the anti-GMO fight, according to OCA’s director
Ronnie Cummins, involves state-level ballot initiatives on “right to
know” legislation, to ensure that consumers can tell from clear labeling
whether GMO ingredients are present in food.  In last November’s
election, some 6 milllon California voters – nearly  40 % of those who
went to the polls – voted for Proposition 37, a ballot initiative that
would have required GMO labeling.

Opinion polls taken before the ballot indicated that a large majority of
Californians, from both major parties, want to have the right to know
whether they’re purchasing GMO-modified food, Cummins said.

But Monsanto and other corporate interests involved in genetic
engineering and agribusiness waged a \$45 million scare campaign against
the labeling measure, and although ballot proponents got financial
support from several organic food related businesses and were able to
mount a modest media effort to counter the corporate barrage, the ballot
question lost by a narrow margin in November.  Many “no” voters
indicated that they ended up opposing the measure because they feared it
might hurt small family farmers, or that it would cause large increases
in food prices, or that it would subject California agriculture to an
unwieldy state regulatory bureaucracy.

OCA and its allies are studying the reasons why people who want more
information about GMOs in food nevertheless rejected the ballot measure,
Cummins said.  But activists are not considering the California vote a
real defeat.  Instead, organizing efforts are underway to pass ballot
initiatives on GMO labeling in more than a dozen other states, with the
state of Washington being a special focus for the near future.

Many activists in the GMO labeling campaign are opposed to all use of
genetic engineering in foods, Cummins acknowledged at the Friends
Meeting event, but the focus of the campaigns is on “honesty,” on the
public’s right to know.

In addition, Cummins said, the anti-GMO and pro-labeling activists are
reaching out to activists in other movements, notably the ones against
the overuse of pesticides and the abuse of farm animals in agribusiness
feedlots, as well as environmentalists working to battle global climate
change.

Most genetically modified grain crops are fed to animals, not directly
to human beings, Cummins said, and there is a clear connection between
Monsanto’s promotion of GMO crops, excessive use of agricultural
chemicals, and the fattening of animals in overcrowded feedlots where
large doses of antibiotics are needed to prevent outbreaks of disease.

Animal-based agriculture also is a major source of “greenhouse” gases,
both because of the methane generated by animal feedlots and because of
the fossil fuels used in farm equipment, in transporting meat to market,
and in agriculture chemicals used to grow feed grains.  By forging
closer ties among animal welfare groups, anti-pesticide activists,
climate change activists and the anti-GMO movement, it may be possible
to organize a much stronger movement for fundamental change.

Two recently organized activist campaigns in the metro DC area are
poised to join the fight, according to Alexis Bader-Mayer, the political
director for OCA, who organized the Jan. 3 meeting at the Friends
Meeting House.  A new organization in the District called “GMO Free DC”
and a sister organization, formed only last month, called “GMO Free
Maryland” both are organizing to for local labeling laws to inform
consumers about GMO foods.

Addressing the issue of GMO foods from another angle is Adam Eininger of
“Occupy Monsanto,” a loose coalition of activist groups in many
different states and several foreign countries who are using nonviolent
civil disobedience and other forms of direct action to spread awareness
about Monsanto and GMOs.

One focus of Occupy Monsanto activism in this coming week will be a
demonstration outside the courthouse of the U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Federal Circuit at 171 Madison Place, N.W., in Washington, as the
court prepares to hear an appeal in the case OSGATA v. Monsanto.

In this case, the Organic Seed Growers and Trade Association  (OSGATA)
originally sued to prevent Monsanto from engaging in the practice of
bringing “intellectual property” suits against non-purchasers of the
company’s genetically engineered “Roundup Ready” crops – including corn,
soybeans and canola – who find their own organically raised crops
cross-pollinated by pollen from nearby fields using Monsanto’s products.

In the past, Monsanto has filed some 144 lawsuits (and settled around
700) involving non-purchasers of Monsanto seeds genetically engineered
to be resistant to the company’s popular “Roundup” herbicide.  The
company has won several lawsuits it which it claimed that farmers whose
fields have been pollinated by pollen drift from “Roundup Ready” crops
had violated Monsanto’s patents, by raising Roundup-ready plants without
paying Monsanto for the privilege.

Monsanto in its defense has claimed that the farmers in question were
not raising Roundup-ready crops by accident, but were deliberately
making use of pollen drift and accidental pollination to take advantage
of Monsanto’s technology without paying for it.  In its defense against
the OSGATA lawsuit, it argued that it had no intention of bringing suit
in the future against organic farmers who did not welcome
cross-fertilization from Roundup-ready fields.

In February 2012, the federal district court for the Southern District
of New York sided with Monsanto in the case, ruling that the organic
seed farmers’ allegations against Monsanto were “unsubstantiated” and
that the plaintiffs had no evidence that Monsanto had threatened them
with legal action due to their crops being pollinated with Roundup-Ready
genes through “inadvertent means.”

In its appeal of the lower court ruling, however, OSGATA and a number of
public interest groups filing amicus or “friend of the court” briefs are
arguing (among other things) that Monsanto’s patents and its practice of
taking aggressive legal action to prevent the unauthorized use of its
patented GMO crops have created a situation of fear and uncertainty for
organic famers.

According to the plaintiffs, this has subjected organic seed growers to
unwanted expenses in the form of spending large sums to plant buffer
crops between their crops and neighboring fields, so as to prevent
cross-pollination, and  spending extra money to clean their equipment to
make sure it is not contaminated with patented Monsanto GMOs.

As the court of appeals prepares to hear the appeal on Jan. 10, Occupy
Monsanto plans to join organic farmers from around the country in a
demonstration outside the courtroom, and Eininger is inviting other
concerned activists to attend.

Occupy Monsanto also will hold a small, basically friendly demonstration
at President Obama’s second inauguration celebration on January 21,
Eininger said.

The demonstration is not designed to be overly critical of Obama, given
the overall celebratory atmosphere of the second inaugural event,
Eininger said.  But demonstrators will seek to inform the President’s
supporters of Obama’s promise on the campaign trail in 2007 to exercise
adequate oversight over large agribusiness – a promise seemingly belied
by the Obama administration’s later appointment of Michael Taylor, a
former vice president for Monsanto, to become Deputy Commissioner for
Foods at the FDA.

*Washington Socialist* readers who are interested in learning more about
the anti-Monsanto and anti-GMO fights may access more information about
these issues at the web sites
[*http://occupy-monsanto.com/*](http://occupy-monsanto.com/), for Occupy
Monsanto, [*http://www.gmofreedc.org/*](http://www.gmofreedc.org/). for
GMO Free DC,
[*https://www.facebook.com/GMOfreeMD*](https://www.facebook.com/GMOfreeMD),
for the recently formed GMO Free Maryland, and
[*http://www.organicconsumers.org/*](http://www.organicconsumers.org/),
for the Organic Consumers Association.

[*Democracy in the
workplace*](http://dsadc.org/democracy-in-the-workplace/)

Monday, January 7th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist*** &lt;&gt; **January 2013**\
*By Luke Abel and Coleman McFarland*

*Democracy at Work: A Cure for Capitalism* (Haymarket Books) is Richard
Wolff’s passionate argument for Workers’ Self-Directed Enterprises as a
social project, a way forward for egalitarians to change the
organization of production in a globalized world.

The book – less than 200 pages – feels like a pamphlet, and is divided
into three parts. Part I is a historical treatment of the various crises
of modern capitalism from a Marxist perspective.  We get a somewhat dry
summary of causes and consequences of the crisis of the 1930s that will
be familiar to everyone who’s done any political reading at all for the
past 10 years. This is the “boring but necessary” part, needed to
educate readers without much exposure to post-capitalist politics and
thought. Wolff tries to show that crisis is built into the economic
system itself, and that an alternative way of doing things is necessary.

Part II deals with the kinds of alternatives we have already tried, from
social democracy to Stalinism. The “actually existing socialisms,” Wolff
claims, were (and are) actually state capitalisms. This rhetorical move,
familiar to the left, might frustrate the general reader. However, it
speaks to the central point of the book. The revolutionaries of 20th
Century socialism only removed capitalism from the economy’s commanding
heights, but kept it in the workplace. And it’s there, Wolff argues,
where democracy matters most.

The final third leads us to Wolff’s proposed solution, the (awkwardly
named?) Workers’ Self-Directed Enterprises (WSDEs). WSDEs are
reorganized cooperatives where the workers not only collectively own
and/or manage the business, but direct it as well. This entails
appropriating and distributing the surplus – paying workers, paying
taxes, choosing community endeavors to support (like education), and
determining reinvestment. In a WSDE this is handled democratically, with
elections of actual workers to a larger board of directors.

Other than that, the WSDE is like any other autonomous firm in the
market: buying inputs, selling outputs, and generating environmental
externalities. Wolff explicitly states that WSDEs have good incentives
in the market and society, where capitalist firms – whose owners may
live thousands of miles away from the river they’re polluting – do not.
For instance, when faced with a decision of how to deal with industrial
waste, we can imagine a firm directed by its workers to decide to
purchase technology that minimizes pollution rather than paying out more
profits in dividends. This is because the workers live near the site of
production and raise their families there as well. He speaks again to
the general reader steeped in market ideology: We should want good
behavior from our firms. The question is what kind of organization
achieves that?

The descriptions of the inner workings of the WSDE are where the book
really shines. Every worker would have two jobs with a particular task
within the division of labor, and also the job of directing the firm by
deciding what to produce and where, and what to do with the surplus.
Day-to-day management could take many forms – and Wolff glosses over
this a bit. Perhaps the firm’s board will maintain a traditional
management structure, or maybe workers would decide to use other
approaches to coordinate decisions, such as rotating management
positions or using consensus-based decision making. It’s up to them.

If the aim of the WSDE as an organizational form is to democratize the
directorial decisions of firms, Democracy at Work would benefit from a
more serious treatment of how to democratize roles in the division of
labor that have been historically assigned along gender lines, or how a
movement for WSDEs would incorporate struggles against racism and
sexism. These topics were conspicuously lacking, and they deserve a
higher profile in further commentaries on workplace democracy.

Like any good pamphlet, Democracy at Work ends with assessing what is to
be done in our current political context. Wolff favors lobbying the
state for a federal jobs program that could, in the vein of Italy’s 1985
Marcora Law, provide startup capital to workers committed to building a
WSDE. This is an alternative to vague provisions to support “small
businesses” – a regulatory distinction much abused. Proponents of WSDEs
should also seek alliances with existing worker cooperatives as well as
trade unions. Wolff also argues for founding a broad-based political
party that supports WSDEs in its platform.

Should there be any doubt, Wolff explicitly locates a movement for WSDEs
in the socialist tradition, but he is far more interested in engaging
mainstream liberals and conservatives on some fresh terrain, away from
the old fields of right vs. left politics and closer to contemporary
politico-economic language. An exciting aspect of WSDEs is that economic
democracy – within firms themselves – is something that anyone can argue
for in our current political climate without committing himself or
herself to the margins of debate. Workplace democracy – having workers
set production targets and decide what to do with profits – is something
that the average person can discuss at lunch with their coworkers.

See http://democracyatwork.info for more on Wolff’s project.

[*New Year’s ‘Revolutions’ for
Socialists*](http://dsadc.org/new-years-revolutions-for-socialists/)

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* January 2013**

*By Bill Mosley*

Many of us enter a new year with a commitment to turn over a new leaf,
to usher in a new and improved “us” to accompany the change in the
calendar.  For many, New Year’s resolutions may include losing weight,
spending more time with the family, spending more time at work, spending
*less* time at work, etc.

But as socialists, shouldn’t the changes we envision in ourselves
revolve around the goal of creating a more just and egalitarian
society?  We can’t exactly “resolve” social change –saying “I resolve to
bring about a single-payer health care system” doesn’t make it so.  Real
social changes requires being part of an organization or movement of
like-minded individuals over a lifetime of struggle.

Nevertheless, there are numerous changes in our individual behaviors and
practices that can help move the struggle forward, if only a little, by
injecting a little socialism at the grass roots.  After all, virtually
every important social change started with an individual taking action.

So following is my (very incomplete) list of “revolutions” individual
DSA members can take to make 2013 a more “socialist” year than any other
in U.S. history (at least since 1912):

1)   **Come out of the socialist closet** – Do you identify yourself as
a socialist outside of DSA meetings or other progressive gatherings?  If
not, try displaying the “rose and hands” at unusual venues.  Wear your
DSA button at the supermarket; show up at a family reunion in a DSA
T-shirt.  Drop quotations from Michael Harrington or Joe Schwartz where
least expected.  Think about showing the colors at work, especially if
you work in a lefty/progressive organization, and even if you don’t.

2)   **Patronize small, local businesses** – Seek out the true Mom and
Pop businesses in your neighborhood and shun the giant corporations
whenever possible.  Buy your produce at farmer’s markets instead of
Safeway.  Seek out your local co-ops.

3)   Especially – in a corollary to 2 – **don’t EVER shop at Wal-Mart**
– The world’s most hegemonic corporation hasn’t broken ground in DC –
yet – but it’s ensconced in the suburbs and online.  I don’t need to go
into detail here about its abuse of its workers, its destruction of
local businesses, its contribution to sprawl, its shameless exploitation
of near-slave labor abroad.  Think what would happen if everyone adopted
this.

4)   **Create more, consume less** – As David Byrne writes in *How Music
Works*, “\[T\]hose in power don’t want us to enjoy making things for
ourselves – they’d prefer to establish a cultural hierarchy that
devalues our amateur efforts and encourages consumption rather than
creation … Capitalism tends toward the creation of passive consumers.”  
Instead of buying a CD or downloading an MP3, why not spend an hour
playing an instrument (or learning one if you don’t know how?)  Reading
a book or article is fine; but why not occasionally write something
instead (like an article for the *Washington Socialist*)? Instead of
watching football, go out and toss a ball with a friend.  Instead of
watching a commercial movie, put on a puppet show (especially if you
have kids, but even if you don’t)!

5)   **Subvert advertising** – Just because a product is being pushed
online, on TV or in print doesn’t mean it’s any good, but only that
someone wants to make a profit by selling it to you.  I’ve adopted this
“revolution” for several years running:  I make a note of the products
advertisers are most aggressively pushing at me and will make a point of
NOT buying any of those things.  (I may not be the only one:  I recently
bought “No-Ad” sunblock whose very name touts its refusal to advertise –
and implies that at least some shoppers are attracted to the idea).

6)   **Be a “Pistachio Socialist”** – Mix some green with your red!  Any
just, egalitarian future must include protection of the environment as a
central cause.  We can’t save the Brazilian rainforest in a day, but
there are lots of things we can do:  If you drive, do so as little as
possible; walk, cycle and use transit; recycle and use recycled
materials; turn off the lights when you leave a room; plant a tree.

None of this substitutes for the basics:  being active in political
work, paying dues, and making financial contributions to the extent you
can.  But being a socialist should be more than checking the right boxes
– it should be a way of life.  Try working more of the “S-word” into
your daily life in 2013.

Be Sociable, Share!

[*Prospects for Reducing Mass
Killings*](http://dsadc.org/prospects-for-reducing-mass-killings/)

Monday, January 7th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2013**

*By Bill Boteler*

“We need to make access to mental health care at least as easy as access
to a gun” said President Obama in a recent speech addressing the need
for policies to prevent future recurrence of mass killing tragedies such
as the one in Newtown, Connecticut on December 14th.

This would be a worthy policy goal but can it happen in a political
system like the contemporary United States? I decided to explore recent
efforts to address these issues and how special interest groups have
supported or opposed them.

One reason for inadequate access to mental health care is discrimination
by the insurance industry, which has been unwilling to pay for mental
health treatments on a par with other health treatments.

To address this, the mental health parity act, HR1424, was designed to
require insurance companies to require coverage of mental health care as
they cover so-called physical illnesses.  But according to MapLight.org,
a nonprofit organization that tracks campaign contributions and relates
them to politicians’  votes, opponents of health care parity gave five
times as much in contributions as did proponents over a two-year period.

Groups such as AFLAC, Inc., the National Restaurant Association,
America’s Health Insurance Plans and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce
lobbied heavily against passage of mental health parity in the US House
of Representatives and, though they did not prevail, were able to
outspend the bill’s proponents, which included groups such as the
American Psychiatric Association.

Clearly, there are many groups trying to influence these sorts of
policies. These groups are motivated by financial gain as well as other
values. The National Rifle Association is supposed to represent the
interests of private gun owners and their constitutional rights.
According to Sourcewatch, a nonprofit watchdog group, NRA CEO Wayne
LaPierre made over \$900,000 a year, circa 2007. This is not to say that
he doesn’t believe deeply in the Second Amendment. But according to the
Better Business Bureau, in 2004 the NRA spent 46% of its contributions
on fundraising.

The NRA has called for putting more guns in schools and creating a
bigger list of people treated for mental illness, which would be quite a
large one since it is estimated that 1 in 4 Americans are treated for a
mental illness each year.

The Gun Industry has its own lobby group, the National Shooting Sports
Foundation located, ironically, in Newtown, Connecticut.  The NSSF spent
over \$500,000 on lobbying in 2012.  The NSSF has been promoting
military-style assault weapons to increase sales in a saturated gun
market. It has lobbied to keep assault weapons on the market.

One law that was intended to control the mass gun violence was the 1994
Assault Weapons Ban, which expired in 2004. There has been some question
about whether or not the ban was successful in halting mass shootings
since such events are too few to be statistically analyzed.
Nevertheless, the number of mass shootings has doubled since the ban
expired.

Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) stated she will be introducing new
legislation after the beginning of the year to regulate assault weapons.
Her bill will ban the sale, transfer, importation and possession of
assault weapons. It will not affect assault weapons that people already
own. It will also affect big clips, drums or strips of more than 10
bullets.

Clearly, there is a lot of momentum now for some kind of action on these
issues. Other cultural factors such as the effects of violent media are
not part of this article but similar interests will come into play with
any attempt at regulation. The question is whether strong public support
can lead to the persistent pressure needed to overcome the power of
well-heeled interest groups with professional lobbyists. Will the public
get the effective action it wants, or watered-down and underfunded laws
that fail to follow through on promises?

[*Resolved Watch your (socialist)
mouth*](http://dsadc.org/resolved-watch-your-socialist-mouth/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2013**

*By Woody Woodruff*

We take our text today from Frank Luntz, the GOP strategist who taught
right-wingers, including the early Newt Gingrich, the power of words
(particularly, nasty ones).

We socialists should watch our mouths. A lot of the ideological work
that goes on in our everyday lives (often to our grief, as socialists)
takes place in the sentences we utter and the sentences we allow to get
uttered without challenge. In other words – a familiar term – ideology
lives in “the discourse.”

Luntz knew this in 1994 when he helped Gingrich author the
well-known/infamous “GOPAC memo.” Based on focus-group cullings,
“Language: A Key Mechanism of Control” contained what Wikipedia calls a
list of “contrasting words” and “optimistic positive governing words”
for use in describing political factions, self and “other.”

This seminal path to power in the era of Newt’s original
incarnation\[Cc1\] has much to do with the contested terrain of today’s
political discourse, and we socialists and progressives recognize the
specific areas where we have to fight uphill battles past terms like
“entitlements” and “fiscal cliff” – let alone “Kenyan socialist.”

So, a good resolution for socialists in 2013: Take control of the
language in public discourse, or (realistically) more control than we
have now.

Luntz and Gingrich were thorough, intuiting the emotional language of
metaphor that we see echoed in the work (on our side of the political
fence) by George Lakoff, of whom more below.

The GOPAC memo shows that opponents can be labeled or emotionally
associated with words like decay, fail(ure) collapse, destructive, sick,
pathetic, traitor. These qualities can be applied to liberals, union
“bureaucracy” and, of course, “they” or “those people.”

Words and emotions to associated with “our side” include share, change,
opportunity, legacy, challenge, control, truth, moral, courage, reform,
prosperity, movement, children, family, competitive, candid, humane,
provide. These qualities apply to “we” and “us.” After the triumphalist
linguistic mishaps of the Iraq war, the 1994 good-guy term “crusade”
may, however, have discreetly vanished from the current right-wing
glossary. But it may be back someday. Luntz is still in business with
many clients on the right, including the religious right.

Socialists and progressives need to recognize the truth in some of what
Luntz says, and recognize, too, that his glossary of positive terms
spills over with language (“change,” “reform,” “prosperity”) we already
use in our progressive discourse. The argument here is not that we have
to reverse course, but that we should be more conscious of:

&gt;&gt;the values expressed in the words and combinations we use and

&gt;&gt;the additional value of using terms like this consensually,
systematically and as a matter of organizational practice. We need to
sharpen our vocabulary and consciously use it in our organizational
statements and in concert with other progressives.

The immediate reaction – maybe yours, the reader’s – will be to freeze
up at the thought of “political correctness” in language, of the – yes,
Orwellian – label often applied to regulated language within an
organization. And it is a concern.

Still, we need to be opportunistic. Our glossary of positive language
should not be exclusive and reductionist, but inclusive and
accumulative. When contesting a pernicious meme like “fiscal cliff,” we
should gleefully jump on a great piggyback meme-reverser like “fiscal
bluff,” which NPC member Theresa Alt tossed into the mix on the DSA
Activist listserv recently.

George Lakoff, surely our ally in most things and a regular linguistic
analyst of the metaphoric meme traffic in political discourse, points
out that “fiscal cliff,” for instance, partakes of a cognitively rooted
linkage that says up is good, down is bad. Lakoff (a HuffPost regular)
has much to offer us when we test-drive our potential organizational
memes.

We (in our local DC-DSA) are already engaged in this kind of work. Our
“GETUP” training sessions are designed to provide alternative
terminology and narratives for the conventional-wisdom pseudoeconomic
labels that mask ruling-class control of resources, workers and the
reins of government. Terms like “job creators” and “mismatch of jobs and
skills” need to be vigorously countered.

As socialists and progressives we need to be conscious of the power of
our words, phrases and narrative schemas, and whenever possible float
and refloat the successful ones. We as socialists need to develop
specific, easily graspable narratives that power our vision of
democratic public control and management of resources and provision, of
putting market power to the service of people rather than making people
servants of the market.

And, when we as an organization see this language is successful in
pulling off the mask, we need to put that language out there much more
competitively than we are now – make DSA statements and issue DSA
working papers that get some resonance in the main channels of
information.

Resolved?

[*The passing of Gerda Lerner,
92*](http://dsadc.org/the-passing-of-gerda-lerner-92/)

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* January 2013**

*By Carolyn Byerly*

Gerda Lerner, a pioneering feminist scholar, lived a long and unusually
grounded life for one who was radical in spirit and deed.  A refugee
from Nazi-occupied Europe and later one of several co-founders of NOW,
the National Organization for Women, she grounded her feminist analysis
in her own experiences as a wife and mother but also addressed women’s
roles from a class perspective over the course of her career.  She died
Jan. 2 at age 92.

As a major influence in my own consciousness-raising, Lerner offered an
important starting point for those of us grasping for real information
about women’s place in society.  She made her mark as a feminist scholar
for her leadership in women’s studies, having founded the first
university program in women’s history at Sarah Lawrence College in
1972.  What drove her, she said, was the absence of women’s presence in
historical accounts.  She told the *New York Times* in 2002 that
whatever contribution she might make to women’s history and studies
“came out of my practical life experience.”

Lerner’s work was anchored in her own daily life and its varied
experiences, including six weeks spent in an Austrian prison in the late
1930s.  She later said that everything she needed to survive the rest of
her life was learned from those women she lived in close quarters with
during those difficult weeks.  In the course of her life, she
experienced anti-Semitism, misogyny, and McCarthyism.

Gerda Hedwig Kronstein was born April 20, 1920, into a prosperous Jewish
family in Vienna, according to the *Washington Post* (Jan. 5, 2012, p.
B4).  She came to the United States in 1939 with a fiancé who would
become her first husband in a short-lived marriage. It was her second
husband, Carl Lerner, who became her intellectual partner for life. 
They collaborated on a 1951 musical, “Singing of Women,” published a
novel on the rise of fascism in Austria, and co-wrote the screenplay for
“Black Like Me,” a story about a white man who disguises himself as
black in the South.

Gerda Lerner spent most of her academic life at University of Wisconsin,
Madison.  She leaves behind a significant body of work that included
numerous books, including *Black Women in White America* (1972), *The
Creation of Patriarchy* (1986) and *The Creation of Feminist
Consciousness* (1997), and *Fireweed: A Political Biography* (2003),
among others.  In leading the establishment of women’s history as a
recognized field of study, she was never narrow in her own research
pursuits.  She was, for instance, concerned about white women’s role in
the abolitionist movement, about black women’s place in history, and
about housewives and mothers.

Various obituaries have cited Lerner’s autobiographical writings in
which she explored her own central identity as “a typical American
housewife who stayed home to raise my children.”  Lerner didn’t begin
her college education until age 38, when her children were older.  She
completed a bachelor’s at the New School and master’s and doctoral
degrees at Columbia.  Toward the end of her graduate studies, she joined
with feminist labor activist Betty Friedan and others to found National
Organization for Women.

One of Lerner’s well-guarded secrets until she began to publish her
autobiographical works, e.g., *Fireweed*, was her membership in the
Communist Party.  Her husband Carl was a member when she married him in
1949 and she later also joined.  Her memoirs state that what was
important to her was what she believed to be “a strong international
movement for progress and social justice.”  No lover of the Soviet
Union, she was nevertheless interested in the “vibrant experiment” that
was going on within that country.  As witness to history, she predicted
the capitalist nations would unite against the Soviet Union, as they had
done against Russia after the Bolshevik revolution
([*http://jwa.org/media/gerda-lerner-writes-about-communist-party-and-hollywood-10*](http://jwa.org/media/gerda-lerner-writes-about-communist-party-and-hollywood-10)).

Lerner’s Marxist feminist analysis can be seen in her understanding of
class relations, but most markedly in concerns about women’s role in
domestic production and reproduction (aspects of women’s experience
which she believed feminist scholars neglected).  In her efforts to
theorize patriarchal social systems, she factored in women’s birthing
and caretaking roles, which she believed had served to differentiate
gender roles in ways that gave men more power.  She inspired other
socialist feminist scholars globally to advocate for women’s unpaid
domestic work.  Lerner and others who agreed with her have argued
women’s domestic labor should be figured into nations’ GNPs, and women
who stay at home should be compensated through social security.

Lerner was a private person who gave few interviews.  A few years ago, a
media activist filmmaker I know, Janet Fitch, managed to make contact
with Lerner who agreed to give her a 15-minute interview for her film on
gun violence.  Gerder Lerner remained engaged in social justice to the
end of her life.

 
