***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from September 2012 Issue**

**Archived November 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

Saturday, September 1st, 2012

**[Chapter Launches New Socialist Book
Group**](http://dsadc.org/chapter-launches-new-socialist-book-group/)

**By Andy Feeney**

Marx in his earlier works comments somewhere that bees and humans
both build themselves houses; however, the bees do so by instinct;
humans, at our best, first make conscious plans.   With this in mind,
and in hopes of becoming more human and proactive in our politics, the
Metro DC chapter has launched a Book Group to study different theories
of democratic socialism and how to achieve it.

At least initially, the Book Group will supplant our Socialist Salons,
and like the Salons it will normally take place starting at 6:30 p.m. on
the third Thursday of each month.

The group’s first meeting in July featured Ben Kreider, Coleson Breen
and Andy Feeney leading a quick overview of the life and thought of
Michael Harrington, DSA’s intellectual founder.

The second meeting at Soho Cafe in August explored Harrington’s classic
book “The Other America,” a work that helped inspire the liberal “War on
Poverty” in the 1960s.

In the future, we hope also to examine the writings of several socialist
feminists; Harrington’s later works on democratic socialism; David
Schweickart’s “After Capitalism,” on the prospects for market socialism
in the United States;  the works of Dr. Cornel West on race and
socialism; Dr. John Bellamy Foster’s ideas on socialist
environmentalism; and other writings that members suggest.

Please join us. Seriously-disposed nonmembers are also welcomed.

[***DSA Sets NoVa Electoral
Work***](http://dsadc.org/dsa-sets-nova-electoral-work/)

**By Bill Mosley**

Metro-DC Democratic Socialists of America will join the Northern
Virginia Central Labor Council this fall for campaign work on behalf of
Democratic candidates.

DSA, while recognizing the shortcomings of the Democratic Party
nationally (see DSA’s statement on the 2012
elections [*here*](http://www.dsausa.org/NewsFromDSA/2012/16aug2012.htm)),
also is aware of the dangers of a full takeover of the federal
government by the Republican Party, especially given how thoroughly the
Republicans have become dominated by the party’s far right wing.  Many
DSA locals around the country, including the Metro-DC local, will work
in progressive electoral coalitions opposed to right-wing economic and
social policies – to “rebuild the left by defeating the right,” as the
statement puts it.

While the District of Columbia and Maryland are safe Democratic
enclaves, Virginia is one of the nation’s major battlegrounds.  In 2008
President Obama became the first Democrat presidential candidate to
carry the state since Lyndon Johnson in 1964.  It’s very much in play
again this year, with Mitt Romney hoping to put it back in the
presidential column for the GOP, and former Democratic Governor Tim
Kaine in a tight Senate race with George Allen, the former Republican
senator defeated for re-election in 2006.

We need your help to make our 2012 electoral work a success!  Contact us
to let us know if you can join us for campaigning this fall in Northern
Virginia.  Specific locations and dates are to be determined.  We can
provide volunteers with transportation either from DC or a Metro station
in
Virginia.  E-mail [*billmosley@comcast.net*](mailto:billmosley@comcast.net), call [*202-360-5414*](tel:202-360-5414) or
check our [*meetup page*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/) to get
involved!

***Faux Predicts Further Erosion of Workers’ Rights***

***Book outlines “Servant Economy” as cascade of corporate money deforms
politics***\
**By Woody Woodruff**

“There’s another crash out there, and we will be very ill-prepared,”
economist Jeff Faux told his audience at the Economic Policy Institute
Aug. 15. His recent book, *The Servant Economy*,\* traces themes in the
U.S.’s growing economic and social inequality since the Fordist bargain
– increased worker productivity would be rewarded with increases in
wages and benefits – began to unravel in the mid-‘70s.

The nation’s economic weakness remains unresolved, and this development,
Faux said, is “no accident,” nor will a future crash be one.  Two
factors masked the decline since the 70s – the increasing number of
persons in the workforce per household, and the persistent credit
bubble. Those palliatives are now exhausted. “By the mid-2020s we can
expect a 20 percent drop in the real wages of the average American  who
has to work for a low or moderate standard of living,” Faux writes.

Even more critically, the gradual erosion of government’s participation
(at all levels)  in the economy (other than as a customer for galloping
military product sales) has paralleled the decline in workers’ power to
enforce that Fordist bargain and left the chips in the hands of the
corporate elite and the governing class for whom they have become the
essential supplier of funds.

The New Deal  arrangement that saw important government participation in
the economy lapsed “with the age of Reagan, in which we still live,”
Faux writes in *The Servant Economy*. “ By demonizing, downsizing, and
demoralizing civilian government—calling it the problem and not the
solution—Reagan and his successors destroyed not only its capacity to
plan but also its capacity to react to signals of trouble ahead.” That
era saw, Faux concludes, ““the last serious debate within the governing
class on how the nation should respond” to loss of jobs to globalization
. “The debate centered on the question of whether the country needed a
specific industrial policy to save its manufacturing base.” The
neoclassical  economic theory privileging private capital’s prerogatives
won out – in the Carter administration! — despite a remarkable consensus
on the part of heads of major corporations that national planning was
required. Faux doesn’t include a critical event – the rapid defunding of
the congressional Office of Technology Assessment , seen by the right as
the locus of industrial policy. It was finally abolished by the Gingrich
storm troopers during the Clinton administration.

Without a national planning consensus, development became increasingly
dependent on the whims of private capital and clever marketing of social
non-goods, and labor became an appendage, desperate to restore jobs even
in an environment where all the power rested with management. “The age
of Reagan greatly strengthened the class solidarity of our financial
elites and therefore their ability to offload the costs of their folly
\[impervious to evidence\] onto the rest of us.”

This has sharpened public distrust in these major institutions. “The
catch-22 for the Left: 1. Reversing middle-class decline requires that
the government intervene in the economy; 2. The influence of money in
politics guarantees that the government will intervene on behalf of
corporate interests, not the middle class; and 3. Therefore the middle
class will distrust the government and will not support its intervention
in the economy.”

Faux tells the AFL-CIO’s interviewer, Tula Connell, “Media talking heads
complain that Washington is ‘dysfunctional.’ But it is functioning very
well—in the interests of those at the top of the economic pyramid,”
including the governing class of both major parties.

This disparity, clearly, persists in the energy sector, where state and
federal governments can’t generate funds for public goods, and
status-quo development is embodied in the privileged status of Big Oil.
The split between environmental and labor progressives over projects
like the Keystone pipeline, by any measure a planet-wrecking activity,
demonstrates the dependence of what jobs are left on the movement of
private capital.

Faux’s solution is a progressive coalition around a constitutional
amendment to overturn the devastating Citizens United decision that
opened the (already breached) floodgates of corporate cash into the
electoral arena . If the running sore of corporate cash stands, Faux
argues, the “governing class” will become more and morethe chattel of
the corporate agenda and “return us to a pre-New Deal set of social
relations” … a “Servant Economy” in which the rights of workers are
minimized, “the humiliations of daily working life under raw capitalism
will return.” and the labor force is increasingly forced into personal
services rather than the making of products.

Faux suggests that a wide swath of voters beyond the left is convinced
that there is too much money in the political system, and that a winning
coalition could be built around a constitutional amendment to reverse
Citizens United.  “If the last four years have taught us anything, it is
the power of money to intimidate the governing class,” Faux told the EPI
audience.\
\*(Jeff Faux: *The Servant Economy: Where America’s Elite is Sending the
Middle Class* John Wiley & Sons 2012.)

[***Invitation to the New Activist
Committee***](http://dsadc.org/invitation-to-the-new-activist-committee/)

**By Coleson Breen**

As the local has continued to grow, it has become apparent that there is
a great desire to make ourselves heard in local and national politics
though non-violent direct action. The DSA has a long history of
protesting injustices and, simply put, there are serious threats to the
99% which demand action.  Thus we have formed the Activist Committee to
plan and organize protest activities. We are in the early stages of
planning an action to protest the poor service of PEPCO, the utility
that sells electricity to DC and suburban Maryland, and has one of the
worst reliability records in the nation. This campaign would also
include support for a plan, in its early stages, to create a public
utility in Maryland. We need your help to make sure PEPCO is held
accountable for its negligence, and that the plan for a public utility
gets off the ground.

[***Statehood Effort Resets, Reaches
Out***](http://dsadc.org/statehood-effort-resets-reaches-out/)

***Stand Up! gets significant funding***\
**By Bill Mosley**

The DC Statehood movement has come a long way since the birth of the
Stand Up! for Democracy in DC Coalition in 1997 (Free DC).  The local
chapter of Democratic Socialists of America was active in the founding
of Stand Up!, established as a non-partisan organization working for
full democratic rights and statehood for the District.

For most of its highly active 15 years, Stand Up!  has been an
all-volunteer organization, funded through member contributions and
other modest fundraising efforts.  Last year, however, Stand Up! 
successfully applied for two major grants to launch a campaign to
educate the DC public about the need for statehood and to stimulate
discussion about strategies for achieving it.  Supported by a \$50,000
grant from the DC government and \$1,500 from the Diverse City Fund,
Stand Up! created the “Free DC Freedom School,” a unique traveling
school bringing the statehood discussion to neighborhoods, churches and
organizations around the District.  The project was intended to fill a
gap in the campaign in the statehood effort:  While considerable effort
and public funds have been targeted to lobbying Congress and seeking
support for statehood around the country, not enough effort had been
made to build a strong pro-statehood movement within the District.  The
funding enabled Stand Up! to provide compensation to a full-time
executive director to head  up the project.\
During the first half of this year, Stand Up! members conducted more
than 20 teach-ins in all part of the District, engaging citizens in
lively discussions of what statehood would mean for the District.  The
project culminated in a District-wide “Statehood Summit” in June held at
Howard University, where participants heard presentations from DC
Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton  and other elected officials and
activists.  The summit produced a number of concrete proposals for
advancing the statehood effort, including expanding the education and
outreach efforts, engaging in direct action, filing lawsuits and
pursuing a legislative strategy.

Stand Up!, building on the success of the traveling Freedom School,
secured a second grant this year from the DC government to expand its
outreach and education work.  This \$25,000 grant will be used to send
50,000 postcards to constituents in targeted congressional  districts. 
The recipients will be asked to send a separate postcard to their member
of Congress (via Stand Up!), asking him or her to support DC
statehood.   At the end of the campaign Stand Up! activists will
hand-deliver the postcards to the targeted members, encouraging them to
support legislation making DC the 51^st^ state.

Statehood would provide the District not only with voting representation
in both houses of Congress, but also freedom from congressional
interference in DC legislation and budgets.  For example, Congress
recently banned the District from funding abortions for poor women and
has proposed further abortion restrictions, and has threatened to
reinstate a ban on District-funded needle exchange programs to prevent
HIV and AIDS.  No state and no other locality is subject to this kind of
federal micromanaging of its affairs.

For more information on the DC statehood struggle, visit
[*www.freedc.org*](http://www.freedc.org/).

[***What Forces Divide Environmentalists, Organized
labor?***](http://dsadc.org/what-forces-divide-environmentalists-organized-labor/)

**By Woody Woodruff**

Socialists in particular have at lot at stake in Blue-Green alliances –
strategic coalitions formed between labor and environmentalists. Both
are movements that socialists endorse and participate in. Farsighted
labor leaders and workers understand that some big shifts in the working
economy are on the way, and they had better have a strategy for it.
Environmentalists are pitted against corporate giants whose interests in
business-as-usual make them planet wreckers and, by virtue of their
stake in the status quo, deniers of science.

Skeptics might suggest that these coalitions are doomed because of a
culture clash. To use some long-running stereotypes: College-educated,
granola-crunching tree-huggers will never appeal to blue-collar union
workers, they argue.

The blue-green alliances are unstable and constantly imperiled, all
right – but not because of a bogus culture war. The problem has been the
evisceration of national economic planning – the erosion of even the
idea of democratic, public planning – in the rise of the right and of
corporate dominance since the Reagan era. Labor is right to fear the
effects of violent, unplanned shifts in industries, especially energy.
The first casualty of poorly designed transitions is the workers, facing
long periods of joblessness without retraining or support as the social
safety net becomes threadbare.

This  hasn’t been a sudden shift.  Jeff Faux and other left economists
(*see related story, this issue*) trace the decline of manufacturing and
redevelopment oriented toward public goods to the relentless trashing of
government itself since the Reagan presidency, when, for instance, the
first radical defunding of entities like the congressional Office of
Technology Assessment took place with scornful comments about “picking
winners” instead of letting the market do it. “With Reagan’s landslide
\[1984 re-\]election, the United States was out of the business of
thinking about the future,” Faux writes.

The material product of green economic planning was environmental
regulation, and corporations learned quickly how to battle it – with
projections of job loss, targeting the fears of workers. “Job blackmail
studies” like Ford’s on the effects of fuel efficiency regulations “
were quickly picked up by the news media and echoed by studies produced
by corporate dominated think tanks,” one study summarized.

Inequality ensued: The loss of political power by labor as manufacturing
declined and corporate power grew, coupled with the decline of
government participation in the economy as resources dwindled, put the
movement of capital almost entirely on the private side of the terrain.
The Economic Policy Institute’s George Sterzinger says “Climate
stabilization and energy security are public values that will not be
delivered by private free markets acting alone.”

The disputed Keystone pipeline from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico, for
instance, shows the dominance of private capital in these seemingly
public projects. Two governments and at least one large international
union, the Labors International (LIUNA) became the dog wagged by the
tail of Big Oil’s exploitation of the tar sands deposits of Alberta. No
government, including the Canadian conservative regime of PM Stephen
Harper, appears able or willing to undertake large wind or solar
development – because corporate money would not underwrite it. But Big
Oil is unmoved by “public values.”

In Maryland, a labor-green alliance has fought for more than three
legislative sessions to put the state’s puny resources behind an
offshore wind project. Steelworkers have come around to the notion that
erecting big turbines in the shallow waters off Ocean City would mean
many jobs – more, if some of the materials could be fabricated in the
state.

But the struggle has been complicated by Maryland’s inability to finance
the project itself. Private capital must be tempted by sweet deals from
the legislature and – of critical importance – a renewal of the federal
tax advantages for wind power development. The current cheapness of
natural gas has put that goal nearly out of reach. Maryland, thanks to
former GOP Governor Bob Ehrlich, blew all of its bond capacity for years
to come on the Inter-County Connector, the controversial 18-mile toll
road from Montgomery to Prince George’s suburbs, which is rapidly
revealing itself as a white elephant. (It must be admitted that
Ehrlich’s successor, Democratic Gov. Martin O’Malley,  dodged his chance
to scale back the now-completed project).

Even as the offshore-wind forces gear up for another tilt at the
Maryland legislature in January, the labor-green alliance has been
stretched to the breaking point by a real divide. Frederick County is
preparing to build a trash-to-energy incinerator costing over a
half-billion dollars. To have enough fuel to run at capacity, other
counties must send their trash along as well. Prince George’s – whose
last giant landfill is four or five years from being filled up – along
with Washington and Howard counties have shown interest in contributing
their trash.

The project, which Frederick County workforce officials claim would
create 1,600 jobs, has been irresistible to the state’s labor community.
One state labor official said there were assurances that most of the
jobs would be union.

Environmentalists oppose the incinerator because they are campaigning to
get their counties to promote a zero-waste mentality that will reduce
the waste stream and promote re-use and recycling by consumers,
including composting and utilization of food waste. To them, the
incinerator is an incentive to produce more trash (and revenue), not
less.

The state and its counties are at the mercy of private capital in both
instances. Wheelabrator Technologies, which will build the incinerator
by 2015 and subcontract the construction, appears to be footing nearly
half the cost, with Frederick County in for about \$361 million. That is
way more than the \$260 million in bonded indebtedness the Fitch bond
rating company estimated Frederick would issue all the way through 2018
– as it rated Frederick “AAA.” As usual, the public faces the shortfall
while the private capital can waltz away.

The inability to democratically, publicly plan for the future that comes
with the disproportionate amount of capital in private hands puts both
environmentalists and labor behind the 8-ball. Campaigns to right the
inequalities that have crippled public policy since the Reagan era are
almost certainly prerequisites to  permanently securing the green-labor
bond.
