***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from December 2012 Issue**

**Archived November 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Washington Socialist December Issue: After the election, going
global*](http://dsadc.org/washington-socialist-december-issue-after-the-election-going-global/)

Wednesday, December 5th, 2012

**\[Our latest monthly email newsletter appeared in our subscribers’
inboxes Dec. 3. If you are not a subscriber and would like to be,
contact us at dsadcxchange@gmail.com — the Metro DC DSA editorial
team\]**

**We are going across the pond and into the weeds** with this issue of
the *Washington Socialist* – a break, we hope, from the tunnel vision
that the election season seems to have forced on us.\
As socialists, we are accustomed to dealing with the US as it is, to aim
to make it what it could be. But we know we don’t have to fashion
hypothetical models of what the US could be, when industrial societies
around the world are practicing what we socialists are still preaching.\
**Health Care:** The US election more or less affirmed the survival of
our first national health system, flawed and compromised as it may be.
The *Washington Socialist* for December takes a look at the health care
models toward which progressives could push that start-up called
Obamacare.

Jose Gutierrez outlines the **different forms of health care policy**
and practice in Europe – and they are not all “single payer,” for sure.
[*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/the-roads-to-universal-health-care/)

Woody Woodruff examines the **nonprofit health insurer alternative** to
single-payer as practiced in Germany and elsewhere. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/the-nonprofit-model-for-health-care-cost-containment/)

In many nations of the EU, **worker representation** in company
decision-making institutions is mandated by law. How are those
representatives chosen? The interesting differences across borders are
outlined by an article produced by the Institut Superieur du Travail in
a major excerpt translated for *WS* by Metro DC DSA member Lucette
Smoes. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/in-europe-are-the-workers-representatives-elected-or-appointed/)

More specifically, **women’s rights as workers in the EU**, while
institutionally far elevated from their US status, are still contested
terrain. Carolyn Byerly outlines the fights that have been, the state of
play in the EU, and lessons for advancing women’s rights in the US.
[*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/women-workers-rights-in-europe/)

Back home, the **Federal Communications Commission is slipping** toward
a damaging relaxation of the rules that keep corporations from
monopolizing mass communication outlets. The cross-ownership of
newspapers and broadcast media in the same market, long restrained, may
become a piece of cake for buccaneers like Rupert Murdoch, Carolyn
Byerly reports. Obama’s FCC is too business-friendly, and progressives
need to put on the brakes to preserve public interest in the publicly
owned airwaves. [*Read complete
article.*](http://dsadc.org/the-politics-of-media-conglomeration/)

Big Bird was another survivor of the election. Dan Adkins examines
several recent **public television historical series** that make, at
least, brave attempts to explain the social justice aspects of
broad-scale human history, the Dust Bowl and the Gilded Age. [*Read
complete
article.*](http://dsadc.org/popular-sometimes-peoples-history-on-tv/)

And on the political front: national **DSA’s National Political
Committee has adopted a pungent and direct resolution on the so-called
“fiscal cliff.”** A summary excerpt: “Like other progressive groups, DSA
rejects the notion that some ‘unified’ fiscal cliff must be addressed in
the lame-duck session of Congress. It is in fact a ‘fiscal obstacle
course’ that Congress should address without panic early in 2013, while
heeding the election results.” The statement calls for a progressive
coalition to block the bipartisan attack on the interests of working
families and push the better angels of the Democratic Party’s nature to
attack systemic inequality. [*Read the full
statement*](http://www.dsausa.org/NewsFromDSA/2012/26nov2012.htm)

[*In Europe, are Workers’ Representatives Elected or
Appointed?*](http://dsadc.org/in-europe-are-the-workers-representatives-elected-or-appointed/)

Monday, December 3rd, 2012

**The *Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt;December 2012**\
Translated for the *Washington Socialist* by Lucette Smoes

*Editor’s introduction: In the industrial democracies of Europe, a
variety of national laws requires some representation for workers in the
affairs of the company where they are employed. This is often startling
to US workers, whether unionized or not. Every successful experiment in
workers-corporation relations, however, can teach us something about how
to advance our socialist goal. The strength of unions varies greatly
from country to country and there is an interesting difference between
the laws governing labor relations in the US and in the European Union.
This note concentrates on the laws defining the structures and roles of
workers in the European workplace. It is a translation of an article by
J.P. Roulleau and Michele Millor reprinted by permission of the
“Institut Superieur du Travail”*

**&gt;&gt;Election by employees or nomination by the union? The
implementation of employee representation in the enterprises shows a
very large diversity from country to country in Europe. Each country
responds differently and no trend is dominant.**

What is the real source of legitimacy for a certain type of
representation to be recognized in an enterprise? Is it the election by
the wage-earners of an “enterprise committee” or the designation of a
delegate by the union? Each country has its own response and no trend
prevails. This is another difficulty of European social relations.
Another problem underlies this question: what is the role of the
representation — to contribute to the smooth functioning of the
enterprise by helping to resolve difficulties that may occur, or to play
the role of a critic, a challenger, and denounce the errors of
management? Is the wage-earners’ representation recognized as a partner
with true rights, or does it play the role of critical opposition?

**Single or Double Channel**

There are two situations in Europe:

\* The single channel. The union is the only authorized representative
of the wage-earners. This is the case of Estonia, Ireland, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Czech Republic, the United Kingdom, and
Sweden.

\* The double channel with the coexistence within the enterprise of
union representation and a form of representation elected by the
wage-earners. It is the case in Germany, Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Spain, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Luxemburg, the
Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, and Slovenia.

However, in both cases, the situation is evolving.

On one hand, in the “single channel” countries, elected committees
appear. This is the case in Great Britain, but only on a voluntary
basis. By contrast, in Hungary, a law adopted in 1992 theoretically
requires the establishment of such committees, but the practice, it
appears, is slow to conform to law. In the Czech Republic, if there is
no union in the enterprise, these committees may be formed. They have a
right of information, consultation, and eventually negotiation.\
On the other hand, in the “double channel” countries, the role and
functions given to the union in the enterprise can differ greatly, from
simple tolerance in Germany to the exclusive recognition of the right to
conclude agreements in France.

Finally, the ambiguity of the guidance — informational role, or
consultation role? — risks further modifying the picture.

**Closely Related Logic:  Great Britain and Sweden**

\* Great Britain remains faithful to its liberal tradition \[in the
European, 19th-century sense\]. The unions are the only representatives
of the wage-earners’ interests. It is up to them, by their weight, to
impose themselves upon the employer as interlocutors. Tony Blair’s
government recently defined the procedures for the recognition of a
union in an enterprise. The members of the union elect their
representatives, the “shop stewards,” usually at the level of the
workshop or of a department. Together the shop stewards may constitute a
committee which has the right to negotiate once the union is recognized.

In other respects, in some enterprises, management has sometimes
instituted committees which bring to mind our \[French\] enterprises
committees. From one enterprise to another, their composition, their
form, their role varies since they are, up to now, voluntary
initiatives.

\* Sweden, particularly due to its unionization, chose to recognize the
exclusive representation of the wage-earners through their unions, under
various forms: union representatives, delegates for security and working
conditions. Since the law of January 1, 1977, complemented by
legislation enacted April 1982, the employer, before any important
decision, must consult the union representatives and negotiate with them
the modalities of the project. Few enterprises have retained an
enterprise council where questions of common interest are discussed.
These steps conform to the decentralization of negotiations, previously
realized at the branch level and from now on returning to the enterprise
level, but always through the union channel.

**The German System**

\* Germany‘s system is the opposite. It follows very precise rules,
defined by various laws, updated in 1972 and 1976. These regulations are
perfectly accepted and integrated by all parties involved: by the
enterprise, the employees, and the unions.

The enterprise council (Betriebsrat) has a monopoly for the employees’
representation. This council, where the directors are excluded, elects
its own president amongst its members, and represents an essential gear
of industrial democracy. It is part of the joint management. It is the
partner recognized by management as the unique voice of the
wage-earners. These councils should exist in all enterprises with more
than five persons. Elected for four years, they are totally independent.
They don’t receive any imperative mandate from the employees or from the
union. They cannot be dissolved; their elected members are permanent
with a number dependent on the size of the enterprise.

Two complementary and specialized structures complete the council:

&gt; “The delegation of young workers and apprentices” composed of young
workers, elected by wage-earners younger than 24, to represent the
interests of this age group within the enterprise council. One of these
delegates may attend the regular meetings. All the “young delegates”
attend when the council discusses a question that concerns them.

&gt; “The economic council” for enterprises of more than 100 persons. It
includes members that are not elected but nominated by the council. In
contrast with the enterprise council, the employer may participate in
these meetings.

There are also what is called “men of trust.” Designated by the union,
they have no representation role with the employer. They are in fact
relays between union and wage-earners.

\* The German system has inspired the system implemented in Hungary.
However, the enterprise committee’s rights introduced by the 1912 “Code
du Travail” are much less important than those of the German
Betriebsrat.

\* Austria’s system of representation is similar. The law of 1974
defines the functions of the enterprise council, with two distinct
entities: a blue-collar council and a white-collar one. These two groups
may elect a common council if two-thirds of the members want it.

 

**Primacy of the Union**

Unlike the example of Germany, integrated representation recognizes a
certain primacy of the union structure.. In almost all these countries
(Belgium, Luxemburg, France, Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal),
it is the unions that establish the lists of candidates for the
enterprise councils. France created a two-round process. For the first
round, only the recognized unions may establish and present lists. If
these lists don’t receive a quorum, the wage-earners may then form “free
lists” for a second round. In spite of these hurdles, the non-union
lists are now getting almost one third of the enterprise council
positions. Italy, since 1993, has also established an original system of
representation. It tries to reconcile both sources of legitimacy. Two
third of the positions are elected by the wage-earners on union lists,
and the last third is filled equally by the three unions.

Reprinted by permission of the Institut Superieur du Travail, Paris\
Original at www.istravail.com/article285.html.

[*Popular — Sometimes People’s –History on
TV*](http://dsadc.org/popular-sometimes-peoples-history-on-tv/)

Monday, December 3rd, 2012

**The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt; December 2012**

*By Dan Adkins\
*\
Three new series have arrived that are important and useful popular
history.  They are “Mankind: The Story of All of Us,” “The Men Who Built
America,” and “Dustbowl.”  All told there are over 20 hours of public
television  programing.

**Mankind: The Story of All of Us** starts with the inventors of
farming, trade, buildings and war technology. As a TV series it cannot
be as deep as Guns, Germs and Steel, but as a quick overview it is not
bad and gives more weight to China.  An example of this is that over two
millennia ago the first emporia of China had a military that had
mass-produced standardized cross bows.  This was a technique used in the
west 2,000 years later.  It also estimates worker’s situation by using
more recent studies of the cadavers of Egyptian pyramid craftsmen to
identify the rate building accidents by broken bones.  Thus it tries to
more evenly show social evolution and technology.

**The Dust Bowl** by Ken Burns is a beautiful and depressing story of
ignorance and inflexibility in the face of environmental change.  Part
of the ignorance was poor understanding of the fragility of the
grasslands and their history.  Also shown are the migrations out of the
western plains and the social and political repercussions.   Part 2
shows the government’s response to the tragedy and the various economic
and environmental programs and teachings.  With the global rise in
temperature and the resulting decrease of water in some areas it will be
a gamble if future dust bowls can be averted.

**The Men Who Built America** is a history of US industrialization in
the late 1800s.  The series revolves around Cornelius Vanderbilt
(railroads), John D. Rockefeller (oil), Andrew Carnegie (steel), J P
Morgan (electric industry), and Henry Ford (cars).  Lionizing the Robber
Barons and its focus on the 1% is a skewed focus at best and a bourgeois
myth at worst but this history does place the period in the unregulated
new markets of the late 1800s.  These barons are not depicted as
technical innovators but rather manipulators and organizers of
unregulated new industries.  It identifies the real horror of the
resulting depressions and the oppression of the workers and their
organizations. This series peaks with these competitors joining together
to buy a president so as to keep their markets unregulated.  History
provides a surprise In Teddy Roosevelt, who moves progress along by
battling monopolies.  If only Obama had a little of Teddy in him we
would not be at the mercy of Wall Street banks.

When the US was created, 90 percent of non-slave work was in farming.
 If there were market depressions at least most of the US then had
access to food and housing.  In the panics of the late 1800s, working
families not only lost access to food but housing too.  Production
became more interdependent and connected but profits stayed private.
 Risks were taken by the Robber Barons but the only risks to food and
shelter were experienced by the workers.  We still have this system with
the exception that Wall Street risks are taken by the public and there
is a bit of a safety net.

[*The nonprofit model for health care cost
containment*](http://dsadc.org/the-nonprofit-model-for-health-care-cost-containment/)

Monday, December 3rd, 2012

**The *Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt;December 2012 **

*By Woody Woodruff*

Democratic socialists and other progressives can find ourselves in a
real bind when it comes to the politics and practices of healthcare.

We find ourselves in the familiar, unpleasant posture of playing defense
against calls for drastic cuts in social expenditures, including those
for health care – Medicare, Medicaid and the numerous smaller federal
and state-level programs that supplement the provision of care to
low-income persons lacking employer-provided insurance.

And our first response is a Gompers-like “more” – a call for higher
public expenditures to match the burgeoning cost of the current health
care system, which has proved highly resistant to attempts to reduce
those costs. Class-based political stances aside, this may not be the
historical moment to be asking for “more.”

It’s clear that cost containment in US healthcare is a joke – that
health systems in other first-world nations, whatever their
conformation, deliver better care for far less cost. Much of the
eventual success of the Affordable Care Act, AKA Obamacare, is pinned to
projected cost savings. But how? Where are the pressure points
progressives can focus on to reduce costs without cutting services? And
on what points will the industry fight back most fiercely?

Those other industrial nations’ systems provide likely clues. Some are
the progressives’ quest-grail: single-payer. Others (like the
Netherlands) use private insurers, many (but not all) nonprofit.
Germany’s is fueled by a progressive, income-based payroll tax but
insured by about 200 private funds, all of which must be nonprofit to
participate in the national system. Many consider Germany’s the most
likely model for the US, and if the incentives and requirements for
insurer participation in ACA could be incrementally adjusted in
progressive directions, nonprofits could gradually replace the
for-profit system that has made US health care the costliest.

In 2008, Bob Kuttner  estimated that of the \$2.1 trillion spent
annually on health care in the US, \$400-500 billion goes to satisfy
profit margins and shareholders.  That’s a fat target, probably getting
fatter.

In 2011, Steve Hill outlined the attractions of the German system in the
***Washington Monthly***.

“Contrary to stereotype,” Hill wrote,  “not every country in Europe
employs single-payer, or government-run, ‘socialized medicine.’ Unlike
single-payer in Britain, Canada or Sweden, other nations like France and
Germany have figured out a third way that not only appears to perform
better than single-payer, but it also might be a better match for the
American culture.“ Like AHCA, they mandate individual participation, but
“a key difference is that in France, Germany and elsewhere, the private
insurance companies are *non-profits* instead of for-profits.” Unlike
the “system” in the US (more like a free-fire zone) “you don’t have
health care CEOs making tens of millions of dollars. Nor do you have
stockholders demanding the highest return for their investment.
Generally speaking, the profit motive has been wrung out of the system,”
in Hill’s description.  That would have amounted to one-fifth of US
health care expenditures in 2008, again using Kuttner’s numbers.

Observing that some technically “nonprofit” health care systems in the
US still rake in big bucks and pay outlandish CEO compensation, Hill
points to the complementary policy that manages that factor in the
European examples: “negotiated fees for service. In these ‘shared
responsibility’ systems, fees for every health care service and product
are negotiated between representatives of the health care professions,
the government, patient-consumer representatives, and the private
nonprofit insurance companies.”

This is where the national scale of ACA could provide the canvas for
these kinds of enforced savings – savings that would give nonprofits a
level playing field, if not an actual advantage.

Notice, however, that Hill has spilled the beans about the European
health care systems: they are premised on “shared responsibility” – a
social compact that is foreign to US culture except, perhaps, in time of
war.

Uwe Reinhart, a Princeton economics professor focusing on health care,
notes that the systems in France, Germany and the Netherlands are
“goaded by tight regulation to work toward socially desired ends.” (We
should note the in-process nature of this description.) And he, too,
acknowledges that US culture contains the contradictory beliefs in a
right to health care and a right to reject a mandate. That “immature,
asocial mentality is rare in the rest of the world,” he says.

As Hill points out, if privileging the nonprofit sector is proposed as a
solution in the US, “the for-profit health care corporations in the
United States, and the politicians who do their bidding, will fight
tooth and nail against the only types of reforms that have ever proven
successful at reducing costs. But U.S. health care costs are so high,
and so threatening to the nation’s future, that eventually the logic of
reform will prevail.” It would be pretty to think so, but as we have
seen in the past decade, that “immature, asocial mentality” is still
deeply ingrained in the US public.

ACA contains some leanings toward reform that could make it more
effective than it first appears (considering what seemed to be total
capitulation to the big for-profit insurers). Obamacare is already
pointing toward incentivization of nonprofits with its requirement for
an 80% or better “medical loss ratio.” That’s the percentage that must
be devoted directly to provision of medical services; as Kuttner puts
it, “the percentage of the premium dollar actually paid out in health
care benefits.” This could be the leverage that will incentivize and
indirectly select nonprofits; it is hard to imagine a full-blown
buccaneer capitalist health care insurance corporation that can confine
its shareholder dividends, promotion, and CEO compensation to 20% of
total premiums.

It’s likely that medical loss ratios will be a major front for industry
lobbyists, who will try to cut those percentages back, leaving more room
for profits – that is, rewarding shareholders, advertising agencies and
top management.

And it’s becoming clear to even conservative economists that, whatever
value markets have in the general realm of retail and service, they
perversely reward inefficiency in the health care sphere. Kuttner’s 1999
account in the *New England Journal of Medicine* describes a boom in
for-profit HMOs in the decade 1987-1997, in which the number covered by
for-profits rose from 42 percent to 62 percent in a decade. The bonanza
was followed by a bust of proliferation and consolidation that brought
on the piratical practices of today’s most notorious corporate HMOs,
overpromising to gain market share followed by draconian cuts in
benefits to stay competitive on Wall Street. Consumers and regulators,
at this point, engaged in a joint backlash that showed they still had
some power and curtailed many of the worst excesses. But the scene for
today’s chaotic health care marketplace was set.

In 2008, Kuttner updated the state of play in another *NEJM* article:
“The extreme failure of the United States to contain medical costs
results primarily from our unique, pervasive commercialization. The
dominance of for-profit insurance and pharmaceutical companies, a new
wave of investor-owned specialty hospitals, and profit-maximizing
behavior even by nonprofit players raise costs and distort resource
allocation.”

Just a week ago at this writing, three economists in the *New York
Times* noted that “Certainly, it is hard to be against competition.
Economic theory is clear about its indispensable benefits. But not all
health care markets are composed of rational, well-informed buyers and
sellers engaged in commerce.” The health exchanges in ACA that are
designed to give individual insurance purchasers the tools for making
good choices, they say, perversely degrade the efficiencies that large
providers can offer by fragmenting the market.

So, “If health insurance exchanges divide up the market among many
insurers, thereby diluting their power, reimbursement rates may actually
increase, which could lead to higher premiums for consumers.” Exchanges
clearly need to offer good choices, but that doesn’t necessarily require
choices by the boatload – not if there are several large nonprofits with
their scaled purchasing power to cut costs to the insured.

Bill Barclay, DSA member and economist, reminds us of other factors that
make health care uniquely unresponsive to typical  market
“efficiencies.” As the NYT article implies, none of us is an expert on
purchasing health care, because (e.g.) we buy more TV sets in the course
of our lives than we do bypass procedures. And improving our individual
information base will be hard even with the help of health exchanges.
Finally, health care has no saturation point for the individual; we
always want to be healthier or less sick.

Taking the profit out of health care provision will not solve all the
problems of cost in the system, but it’s a point of leverage that is
already implicit in the ACA structure. We socialists can argue in favor
of nonprofit insurers and providers as low-hanging fruit in achieving
the medical loss ratios required, and point to the example of Germany’s
system for proof that that approach works. The ACA, though riddled with
compromises and concessions to the industry, is improvable if not
necessarily perfectible.

This approach, of course, is exactly what corporate conservatives and
their low-information stooges have perennially been watching out
for—“creeping socialism,” a suspected death-of-a-thousand-cuts for
capitalism. Oddly, slow-walking public policy to the left is often
dismissed on our side as too incremental. Socialism, we sometimes
believe, has to arrive all at once… because the gradualist road to
socialism often involves unpleasant disruption without the immediate,
clear benefits that would sell the next step.

A slow socialist path to a nonprofit core in health care may be the
exception – steps that will each demonstrate the value of the process
and sell the doubtful on taking another one. Sometimes it needs to
creep. Health care is such a singularity, so different from any other
“market” structure, that we shouldn’t be surprised that the path to
successful, truly *public* health care might be different too.

[*The Politics of Media
Conglomeration*](http://dsadc.org/the-politics-of-media-conglomeration/)

Monday, December 3rd, 2012

**A clear and present call to socialist action**

**The *Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt;December 2012 **

* By Carolyn M. Byerly\
*In a Nov. 26 article in *Truthout*, reporter Mike Ludwig asked whether
the FCC will “give Rupert Murdoch the powerful gift of media
consolidation.”  The question is a deep and personal one for socialists,
who are at the forefront of challenging the cancer of deregulation in
the media industries.  The media reform and justice movements
challenging the corporate takeover of media emerged in 2003 with
leadership from socialists like Bob McChesney, John Nichols and others,
and it is those of socialist and feminist orientation who have continued
to pound away at a seemingly un-giving wall of corporate power.  I’ve
been very involved in this movement, as I’ll explain later.

This commentary pulls together a quick summary of the politics of media
deregulation and then presents a clear and urgent call to action related
to a measure presently before the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC).\
Media conglomeration is about to get worse if the FCC has its way in
what is widely believed to be a stealth plan to abandon the remaining
cross-ownership rules that limit daily newspapers from owning radio
stations in the same market.  FCC Chairman Julius Genachowski, an Obama
appointee who is pro-business and anti-public interest, distributed an
internal draft of the policy among commissioners in mid-November to
prepare for a December vote.  *No public input is being sought before
that vote.  *If passed, Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation could begin to
buy up radio stations in the same city where he already owns the daily
newspapers.

Imagine a nation where Rupert Murdoch controls most of the means to
communication.  Socialists need to think beyond their own narrow reading
tendencies here – consider the majority of the public who does not read
*Mother Jones, Z Magazine, The Nation, In These Times, Dissent*, or
listen to Democracy Now!

The background is this:

Under neoliberal national policies in the 1980s, US industries began to
deregulate – a buzz word for conglomeration through mergers and
acquisitions.  I first saw this happening in the financial sector when
my own locally-owned bank in Seattle was gobbled up by a big east coast
financial institution.  The same began happening in the media
industries, as well, in the 1980s, something more relevant to freedom of
expression.  The thing for us to keep in mind is that neoliberalism has
been the policy framework for both Republican and Democratic
administrations since the 1980s under Reagan, with roots that go even
farther back.

A consummate neoliberal, Democratic President Bill Clinton gave us both
NAFTA and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the second setting in
motion a wave of mergers and acquisitions in the newspaper and telecomm
world.  To be sure, media ownership had begun to loosen under Reagan, so
that by the early 1990s, hardly a major city still had two competing
newspapers; those that did typically had one controlled by the other
under a Joint Operating Agreement.  But the “T-‘96” as it came to be
called, took away most of the prohibitions on the acquisition of smaller
companies by the big corporations.  Newspapers, book publishing
companies, magazines, public relations firms, radio and television
stations, cable, telephone companies, film companies and theaters soon
were joined under ownership of a few huge parent companies.

In case the pattern here isn’t perfectly clear, the ownership patterns
in media conglomeration happened through both horizontal and vertical
integration.  Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation has been a conglomerate
that owned newspapers (horizontal integration), but now he’s branched
out into other forms of telecommunication companies and is drooling over
the possibility the FCC will lift bans so he can go after radio next.
 Disney, on the other hand, has always moved along a vertical
integration strategy, owning everything from film studios to the
theaters those films show in, as well as other distribution outlets like
TV stations (ABC, Disney Network, Disney Channels Worldwide), product
merchandising and theme parks.  Both News Corp and Disney are among the
top five global media conglomerates, controlling not just the
circulation of ideas and images, but also controlling politics through
the fortunes each reaps through its multiple revenue streams.

We need to conjure up a few old wise old sages who reminded us long ago
that those who control the means of production also control the ideas
that circulate (Marx & Engels) and that women’s ideas will never be
heard so long as men own the newspapers (Susan B. Anthony).

The media conglomerates today have a race, gender, nationality and class
profile, with controlling interests dominated by very, very wealthy
white men who are based mainly in the United States.  In his numerous
books critiquing media conglomeration, Bob McChesney has observed that
the nation has become both more conservative and more de-politicized
under conglomerated media, which have weeded out all but vapid
entertainment and pro-consumer content.  Gone is investigative
reporting, public affairs programming in broadcast, and a broader range
of political discourse.

On Nov. 14, the Federal Communications Commission released its
long-awaited report on broadcast ownership and it only confirmed the
worst.  The report shows that racial minorities presently own
controlling interest in minuscule numbers of broadcast stations – 2.2
percent of full-powered television stations, 6.2 percent of AM radio
stations, and 3.5 percent of FM radio stations.  Females own controlling
interest in only 6.8 percent of television stations, 7.8 percent of AM
stations, and 5.8 percent of FM stations.  The situation with minority
ownership, particularly black radio, is particularly dire – the medium
that has historically given the African American community the means to
articulate its experiences, perspectives and culture – appears to be
shrinking out of existence.  This loss of voice represents both a civil
rights and women’s rights issue of deep and immediate concern to 12
percent of the nation’s population, those who comprise the African
American community, and the 51 percent who are female.  Women should
also consider that the low numbers of stations we own are mostly under
single ownership (i.e., women tend to own only one or two stations) in
rural or other minor market areas.  Who speaks for us?

The sorry state of women’s and minorities’ broadcast ownership has been
challenged in the courts.  The Third Circuit Court rulings in the
*Prometheus vs. the FCC* (2003) and *Prometheus II vs. the FCC* (2011)
required the FCC to address the structural problems preventing women and
people of color from owning and maintaining ownership of broadcast
stations.  In fact, both rulings directed the FCC to consider the 47
proposals to improve women and minority ownership that the Minority
Media and Telecommunications Council (which represents minority
broadcasters) put before the commission in 2003.  The FCC has
continually delayed in doing so.

Why should socialists – and feminists – be concerned about broadcast
when we have the Internet and all those left-wing and women’s
publications?  First, because the airwaves used in broadcasting are
*owned by the public* and are supposed to operate in the public
interest.  At present, they do not.  If we (the public!) don’t demand
they return to serve us, they will continue to serve mammon.  We should
also keep in mind that even Amy Goodman’s and Juan Gonzales’ Democracy
Now!, which originates on WBAI-FM, New York, is *broadcast*, even though
it can also be streamed via Internet.

Second, most people in the U.S. today listen to broadcast radio, not
satellite or Internet radio, and they watch network (i.e., broadcast)
television, not cable.  While broadcast TV networks (ABC, CBS, NBC, and
Fox) are required to be carried by cable providers like Verizon, Comcast
and Time Warner, millions of people who live in both urban and rural
areas still get these networks through the traditional means – antennae.
 This is a class, race and gender issue since most of those who do not
have cable are low-income men and women, and many are ethnic or racial
minorities.  Third, the ownership and control of broadcast stations is
part and parcel of the larger issue of corporate media ownership, since
all are presently dominated by those huge mega-corporations we mentioned
earlier.   There will never be a broader political spectrum of opinion
available on the media unless ownership is diversified.

Stopping the cross ownership rules from being lifted is a step in the
direction of a bigger struggle, but it’s a step that those of us on the
Left must take.

Several of my colleagues at Howard University and I stepped into the
ownership mess a few years ago by forming the Howard Media Group
([*www.howardmediagroup.org*](http://www.howardmediagroup.org)), with
the commitment to give women and minorities a voice at the
communications policy table. To date, we have submitted numerous
comments during public proceedings, testified before the Commissioners,
met with Media Bureau staff numerous times, and conducted research
associated with media ownership and diversification.  We have had a
modicum of response, not the least of which was the adoption of our
recommendation about four years ago that the Media Bureau develop an
online reporting system for all stations, both full powered and low
powered, and should report the data from those reports to the public.
 Stations, which are required to report every two years, have done so in
both 2009 and 2011.  The Nov. 14 ownership report is the first output
from this change in procedures, and can be found at
[*http://transition.fcc.gov/mb/*](http://transition.fcc.gov/mb/).

The FCC (www.fcc.gov) is a five-member body, with three commissioners
representing the party in power (presently Demos) and two of them
representing the minority party (the GOP).  Commissioner Mignon Clyburn,
an African American who has worked closely with the civil rights
community, and Commissioner Jessica Rosenworcel, who replaced that great
champion of public interest, Michael Copps, last year when he retired,
are presently the only two commissioners who can be counted on to speak
up for the public interest.  But public pressure has had some impact in
the past and needs to be applied again now.

I urge everyone who reads this article and takes its messages to heart
to write even a short note to the FCC and urge them not to lift the
cross-ownership rules.  Your letter should reference this proceeding –
**MB Docket No. 09-182, 2010 Quadrennial Review** – and addressed to:

Chairman Julius Genachowski\
Commissioner Robert McDowell\
Commissioner Mignon Clyburn\
Commissioner Jessica Rosenworcel\
Commissioner Ajit Pai\
Federal Communications Commission\
445 Twelfth Street, SW\
Washington, DC, 20054

If you want to see a sample letter on the subject, you can check out the
one that our Howard Media Group filed last week at
[*http://www.howardmediagroup.org/*](http://www.howardmediagroup.org/).
 Click on the homepage item under latest news, “[*Howard Media Group
files letter with
FCC*](http://www.howardmediagroup.org/news/howard-media-group-files-letter-fcc).”

 

[*The Roads to Universal Health
Care*](http://dsadc.org/the-roads-to-universal-health-care/)

Monday, December 3rd, 2012

**The *Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2012**

*By Jose Gutierrez*

The World Health Organization (WHO) produced a report in 2000 that tried
to rank the health care systems of the world. In that report, the US
system came in at 37th, between Costa Rica (36^th^) and Slovenia
(38^th^).

Total expenditure doesn’t seem to be the issue. In 2007 the US spent 16%
of it’s GDP on health care, without covering everyone in the country.
The number for France was 11%, for Germany it was 10.4%, for the UK
8.4%, for Japan it was 8.1% — and these countries cover their entire
population or close to it.

According to author T.R. Reid’s *The Healing of America: A Global Quest
for Better, Cheaper, and Fairer Health*, the health care systems around
the world can be divided among four major types:

**The Beveridge model, or socialized medicine**

After the Second World War, the Labour Party of the United Kingdom put
into action the ideas of social reformer William Beveridge and created
the National Health Service. Health care is provided by the government
through tax payments like other public services such as education. Many,
but not all, hospitals and clinics are owned by the government.  These
health-care systems tend to have lower costs because the
government controls what the government can do and what they can charge.

A number of countries use this type of system, including the UK, which
is the 18^th^-best system in the world according the WHO report, and
Spain, the 7^th^ best. The Scandinavian social democracies and New
Zealand also have this type of health care system. Cuba, number 39
according to the WHO, is another example.  Ironically, capitalist Hong
Kong has socialized medicine while the People’s Republic of China does
not.

**Single-Payer model**

Single-payer, or Medicare for all, has been the goal of much of the
American left since the times of FDR. Truman proposed this type of
health care in the 1940’s and Ted Kennedy was an advocate for much of
his political career.

Our neighbor to the north, Canada, has this type of system.  In 1944,
Tommy Douglas became the premier of the Canadian province of
Saskatchewan and formed the first socialist government of a Canadian
province. Douglas introduced single-payer health care to the province.
Other provinces soon followed and eventually the federal government of
Canada. According to the WHO it is the 30th best system in the world.

Single-payer uses private-sector providers but payment comes from a
government-run insurance plan that every citizen pays into. Government
negotiates lower prices, and as a result the same drugs in Canada are
cheaper than in the US.

In the 1990’s health experts from Taiwan looked at different health care
systems and they decided that the single-payer was the one that suited
their needs. It was used as the model for the health care system of the
island.

**Multi-Payer model**

After the unification of Germany in 1871, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck
feared the growing popularity of the German Social Democrats, the SPD.
To win support from the working class, Bismarck began the creation of
the first modern welfare state and the current German health care
system.

In some superficial ways, the German system would seem similar to what
many Americans already have through their jobs. The system is financed
from deductions from employers and employees through payroll deductions.
Unlike in the US, health insurance plans in Germany cover everybody and
they don’t make a profit. Tight regulation gives government much of the
cost-control that single-payer models provide.

Germany’s system was considered by WHO to be the 25^th^-best system, but
France, which also has a multi-payer system, was considered to be the
best in the world. Japan’s was 10th.

Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland have been studied by American
health care experts who were looking for an alternative to single-payer,
and proposals by the Clinton administration, the Heritage Foundation (a
conservative think tank) and others have been partly based on this
model.  The Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, itself owes some ideas to
this model.

**Out-Of-Pocket model**

The richest countries, except for the United States, have universal
health systems, but many of the countries of the global South have no
health systems or systems with huge gaps. Hundreds of millions never see
a doctor. The poor who can save enough can see a doctor; otherwise they
go without medical care.

In the US we have elements of all four models. Our veterans have
socialized medicine through the VA. Our seniors have Medicare, a
single-payer system, like Canada. A diminishing number of those who are
employed full-time have insurance through their job, like in Germany. 
For too many in our country, the access to the health care system is not
that much better than in developing countries and worse than in some
Latin American countries.

**Some observations**

One observation that should be made is that in Germany, the UK, Canada
and other countries, the development of universal health care was a
reaction to a rising socialist movement or one of the policies
implemented by a socialist movement.

Secondly, even though the multi-payer models superficially are similar
to the US system now and under Obamacare, most of the basic benefits are
provided by non-profits.

Thirdly, all of these countries, including the ones that have
multi-payer systems, have all-payer regulations. Government bargains
with health care providers such as doctors, hospitals and pharmaceutical
companies to set prices for medical goods and services. The prices
agreed to are binding on all parties.

In the US, Medicare and Medicaid restrain costs, but there are no such
restraints on the private sector. The state of Maryland has operated an
all-payer system for hospitals since 1977 and has ~~since~~ seen costs
rise more slowly than the national average.

Bob Kuttner outlines (see related article) the rampant commercialization
of the US health care system, with medical expenditures leaking away
into advertising and promotion, executive salaries and shareholder
dividends. That for-profit activity, along with the lack of all-payer
bargaining, help make US health care the world’s least cost-effective. A
shift to nonprofits as in France and Germany and broad negotiation of
service and product costs can bring US health outlays, currently well
above \$2 trillion annually, into line while covering nearly everyone.

[*Women Workers’ Rights in
Europe:*](http://dsadc.org/women-workers-rights-in-europe/)

Monday, December 3rd, 2012

**Glowing but Still Imperfect Models for the Rest of Us **

**The *Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt;December 2012**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

In the broader spectrum of workers’ rights, where are women’s?  Do laws
recognize women’s rights to the same jobs that men hold, to the same pay
that men get, and to accommodation for the biological realities
associated with motherhood?  Are women more equal as a result of laws?

These questions first came to me when I was doing research in Paris in
the late 1980s.  Across the street from my budget hotel on the Left Bank
was a brick-front building that served as a public day care center. 
Both professional and working class parents and their pre-school
children lined up each morning waiting for it to open, and each
afternoon, parents came back to pick up their kids, who were always
cheerful and sometimes carried pictures or something else they had
made.  It was an eye-opener as to how that European nation supported its
working families.

More recently, I’ve had a chance to learn some of the answers to these
bigger questions for nations in the European Union, in connection with a
project I’ve been involved in as a contract researcher over these last
months.  The study is to learn how the EU’s gender mainstreaming
mandates have been enacted (or not) by media companies. (More detail
follows later in the discussion.)

Women’s employment rights became part of the European legal framework in
the 1950s as nations began to incorporate anti-discrimination statements
into their labor legislation, one aspect of embracing social democracy. 
For example, Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome, which created the
European Community (EC) – the forerunner of the European Union –
required each member state to assure “men and women should receive equal
pay for equal work.”  Having an overarching political and legal
structure from this time enabled women to begin working for broader
applications of institutional change.

Activism is what enabled the following events to occur.  From the 1960s,
feminist mobilization successfully coalesced into a global movement in
Europe (as elsewhere).  By the 1970s women were pushing for more
specific laws and policies that affected the workplace, both within
their own nations and at the regional (Euro) level.  Legal suits brought
by women contributed to their labor rights by establishing case law, as
with the 1975 ruling by the European Court of Justice in *Defrenne II*,
forcing European states to introduce equal pay legislation.  That same
year, the EC defined “equal pay,” applying it both to elements of work
and to forms of remuneration (including benefits).  A series of
subsequent directives adopted by the EC in the 1970s and ‘80s added
gender equality to employee training, social security benefits, and
pensions.

The Nordic nations were among the first and most progressive in Europe
to address gender equality.  Norway, for example, enacted a national law
on gender equality in 1979, which extended into labor and other aspects
of civil society.  Laws enacted in both Sweden and Norway from that
period also created the “ombudsman” to monitor gender equality and human
rights and to process complaints of discrimination.  Today, national
legislation also provides the most generous maternity and paternity
benefits in Europe and mandates subsidized municipal child care centers
for children up to school age.  In Norway, mothers are presently given
14 weeks of leave at full pay, and both parents can share additional
leave at partial pay; nursing mothers are given up to an hour a day to
breast-feed their children. Under Finnish law, parents may stay at home
with children up to age 3 and there is a monetary allowance for
childcare.  Employers are encouraged to allow parents to work part time
until children are 7 years old.

Like feminists in other western nations, European feminists worked
together to create a structure for institutionalizing policies and
practices.  The creation of the European Women’s Lobby (EWL) in 1987 by
17 organizations in 12 nations gained full legal standing under the EC
in 1990, establishing offices and staff in Brussels
([*http://www.womenlobby.org/spip.php?rubrique43&lang=en*](http://www.womenlobby.org/spip.php?rubrique43&lang=en)). 
The EWL provided the structural mechanism for women to push quickly for
workplace measures that became required for all EU member nations to
incorporate into their laws.  In 1992, for example, the Pregnant
Workers’ Directive was adopted, setting standards for maternity leave
and pay, health and safety protections, paternity leave and pay,
breastfeeding breaks, etc., across Europe.

That same year, the EU Council recommended that member states ask
employers to support child care.  Measures adopted in 1996 and 1997
expanded parental leave and part-time work requirements for employed
parents.  The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights adopted in 1990 makes
gender equality a fundamental responsibility of all nations entering
into the EU, and as amended in 2002, extends women’s employment rights
to promotion, vocational training, working conditions, social security
and the right to return to her same (or equivalent) job after maternity
leave.

One of the most far-reaching pieces of legislation was that to establish
a European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE).  Proposed by the
Swedish Minister for Gender Equality in 1999, and followed by years of
planning, the EIGE
([*http://www.eige.europa.eu/*](http://www.eige.europa.eu/)) was
formally created in 2010, with headquarters first in Brussels, then in
Vilnius, Lithuania.  The EIGE has authority to “mainstream” gender
equality across the institutions of the EU nations, and also to monitor
its progress.  In the media sector, which I study and have had the most
involvement with as regards EU activities, this includes eliminating
sexist stereotypes and including more information about women in both
news and entertainment media.  In its monitoring role, the EIGE is
presently conducting a major 28-nation study to determine whether media
companies possess policies on gender equality, hire and promote women at
the same rate as men, etc.  But media are only one aspect of the EIGE’s
concerns.

We might ask whether and how all these progressive policies have
affected women’s employment and status in the EU.

The *Global Gender Gap Index*, published annually by the World Economic
Forum, shows that in 2012, the Nordic countries are leaders in gender
equality in education, high healthy life expectancies, and employment.
 The report
([*http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF\_GenderGap\_Report\_2012.pdf*](http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GenderGap_Report_2012.pdf))
says, “patterns vary across the Nordic countries, but, on the whole,
these economies have made it possible for parents to combine work and
family, resulting in high female employment participation rates, more
shared participation in childcare, more equitable distribution of labor
at home, better work-life balance for women and men and, in some cases,
a boost to declining fertility rates” (p. 22).  The overall gender gap
ratings among 134 nations place Iceland 1^st^ (for the fourth
consecutive year), Finland 2^nd^, Norway 3^rd^, and Sweden 4^th^. 
Ireland is 5^th^ and Denmark 7^th^.  Most of the remaining EU nations
all rank above 20^th^ place, though a few fall remarkably low:  Bulgaria
52^nd^, Poland 53^rd^, Italy 80^th^, Greece 82^nd^. Hungary 81^st^, and
Malta 88^th^.  Canada and the United States placed 21^st^ and 22^nd^,
respectively, with the U.S. ranking dropping 5 positions below 2011 (pp.
22-3).

While these are the overall rankings that take a range of elements in
well-being into consideration, the report for working women is less
rosy.  Denmark drops to 31^st^ in wage equality, Ireland to 12^th^,
Finland drops to 15^th^, Norway to 21^st^, and Sweden to 49^th^.  Canada
and the United States placed 35^th^ and 61^st^, respectively in the wage
equality category.  It bears noting that while neoliberalism has invaded
Canadian society since the 1980s, much as it has the rest of the world,
the nation has been able to hang onto most of its pro-social democracy
policies.  Within that political-economy, Canada’s women’s movement was
able to institutionalize laws and policies on gender equality that have
remained intact.

There are three big lessons to be taken by women in the United States
from this brief comparison of women’s labor and other rights in Europe
and North America.  The first is that women would be wise to be bolder
in our political visions, thinking more like social democrats (or rather
democratic socialists, as we call ourselves in the US) to achieve a
progressive legal framework for laws and policies governing labor and
other rights.  The second is to consider how to leverage more power,
particularly in the workplace, by seeking leadership positions within
labor unions.  As I will explore in a future commentary, unions have not
historically or presently always been the friend of working women, but
there is potential for structural intervention by unions that can and
should be serving women well.  Third is to recognize that laws and
policies alone will not stamp out the deeply imbedded (and unfortunately
pretty universal) reality of male dominance.  Beyond the legislatures
and courts, this deeper malady has to be addressed in institutions where
moral and attitudinal systems emerge:  families, religions, schools, and
the ever present cultural industries.  I will also address this in
future commentaries.

*The International Labor Day Is Celebrated May 1*

A Washington Socialist Report

On Tuesday, May 1st, a large contingent of DSAers participated in the
largest May Day celebration the national capital has seen in years.

Around 15 DC-DSA members of all ages gathered at Meridian Hill Park
(often known by the Left as Malcolm X Park) in the early evening. There
was a real Maypole, and a pageant of people dressed up in costume
recited speeches from long-gone May Days. There was also a performance
of the *Internationale* by the Dc Labor Chorus.

The contingent of several hundred leftists marched east a few blocks to
14th Street and then south on 14^th^, ending at the White House.

All in all, it was a worthwhile revival of a once-proud tradition of
celebrating May Day (the real Labor Day) on the left.
