***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the October 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*October Newsletter: DSA’s DC general election endorsements and action;
climate change challenges, everyday events and post-summer activism
renewal*](http://dsadc.org/october-newsletter-dsas-dc-general-election-endorsements-and-action-climate-change-challenges-everyday-events-and-post-summer-activism-renewal/)

Thursday, October 2nd, 2014

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the October 2014 edition of *The Washington Socialist*, the
online newsletter of the DC Metro Democratic Socialists of America.**

What with all contributors still breathing hard after that doorstop
[*Labor Day
issue*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f80460413a&e=003de9ccab)
that you probably haven’t finished reading yet, this is a terse and
newsy newsletter this month, mostly about everyday stuff. Raymond Mungo,
in his 1970 classic *Famous Long Ago*, called it “ped-Xing” – the
grinding everyday work of activism. Most of our accounts in this
newsletter are about that everyday work, those everyday events that add
up to significance and change.

**First, what’s on the calendar for October: *UPDATED (Oct. 9)
below***↓\
Metro DC DSA’s next membership meeting, Saturday, Oct. 11 at 1:30 p.m.
in room A9 at the Martin Luther King Jr. main library building, features
a presentation on the “Green New Deal.” David Schwartzman, a professor
emeritus at Howard University, a Statehood Green Party activist and a
member of Committees of Correspondence for Democracy and Socialism
(CCDS), will deliver a visually augmented presentation on the Green
Party’s “Green New Deal” proposal, with Q and A afterward. David
Schwartzman is an environmental scientist and a veteran advocate for
solar and renewable energy. He has published articles on Green energy in
various socialist publications. The MLK branch is at 901 G St NW,
Washington, DC; accessible either from Gallery Place or Metro Center
Metrorail stations. Check the [*Meetup
site*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=3e5de1ac01&e=003de9ccab)
for any new information on this event.

**Other events:**\
Brian Kovalik has invited all fellow DSA members in the DC area to come
over to the Lamont St Collective (1822 Lamont St NW, 20010) this Friday,
October 3rd, for a **film screening and discussion of *The Internet’s
Own Boy*.** The film starts at 7:30 p.m. The film documents Aaron
Swartz’s life, work, and suicide. Aaron was an internet prodigy who
committed his life to the democratization of information, net
neutrality, and internet freedom. Aaron tragically chose to take his own
life two years into a long legal battle that would likely have lead to a
jail term for him. It stemmed from his attempt to democratize JSTOR, a
publicly funded but privately controlled information database that
includes many scholarly publications. The discussion of the film will be
led by David Segal, the executive director of Demand Progress, an
organization Aaron Swartz founded.

**DC Metro DSA’s first Happy Hours in Virginia** kick off Thursday,
October 9 at 6:30 p.m. at the [*Heavy Seas
Alehouse*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=043f8c99e4&e=003de9ccab),
1501 Wilson Blvd., “with our brothers and sisters of DC DSA. No agenda,
no schedule, no topic, just some good conversation and beer.” Heavy Seas
Alehouse is a block or two from Rosslyn Metro. Parking is on the street.
There is also free parking a few blocks away. RSVP on the [*Meetup
site*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=232b84cc69&e=003de9ccab).
Organizers say “we will reserve a table whenever we have an estimated
head count.”\
***UPDATE**: The monthly **Socialist Salon, Thursday, Oct. 16, features
“Marxism and African Social Movements After World War II: A Group
Discussion led by Nicole Gerber.***

Nicole will start off this event with a 20-25 minute introduction, then
open the meeting to Q and A and discussion.  The event will focus on the
theories of struggle, identity and national liberation proposed by Franz
Fanon, Sekou Toure, Chinua Achebe and Nelson Mandela, how they attempted
to implement socialist policies with an “African character” in the
independence and post-independence era, and how these efforts were
affected by the Cold War and neo-imperialist economic policies in the
West.

The Salon meets Thursday, October 16 at 6:30 p.m. at Hunan Dynasty, 215
Penna. Ave. SE; best Metro approach is Capitol South.  Updates on the
[*Meetup
site*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=bd96e5962c&e=003de9ccab)
.

**October’s articles:**\
Metro DC DSA has **endorsed candidates** in November’s DC General
Election, and will be planning various forms of support for them. Our
endorsement release [*merited a
mention*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=06f01cdb67&e=003de9ccab)
in the WaPo political blog. Bill Mosley provides a wrapup of the local’s
endorsements and their reasons. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=194ba7d3d2&e=003de9ccab)

An event that definitely qualified as significant on its own was the
**Climate March** in New York City Sept. 21 that drew more than 300,000
climate non-skeptics. DSA’s presence there (check the national’s
Facebook page) was substantial, youthful and included several DC Metro
DSA members. One of them was Andy Feeney, who offers a couple of
observations about the overall radical presence in the march and
provides some extended “good reads” evaluations of a handful of radical
analyses of the climate crisis under capitalism. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=33210e2532&e=003de9ccab)

The furor over **Ferguson, Mo**. and the murder of an unarmed young
African-American man in that town continues to roil observers around the
country, including panelists and audience at a recent meeting at Busboys
and Poets. Ingrid Goldstrom provides an account. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=805194347b&e=003de9ccab)

DSA’s relationship to the local chapter of **Jobs with Justice**
continues and the organization’s plan of work for the near future was
outlined at its most recent meeting. Kurt Stand was there and reports.[
*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f78d21ac44&e=003de9ccab)

The excitement over Scotland’s recent referendum on splitting from the
United Kingdom appears to be masking more unpleasant aspects of
**politics in the UK** itself, several London School of Economics
professors told an audience in the District recently. Ingrid Goldstrom
outlines the narrative of two parties, one ostensibly socialist,
beginning to look more and more like one another. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6a503ae52f&e=003de9ccab)

And there are more of our usual **“good reads”** here, including Sam
Pizzigati’s latest “Too Much” and news on the recent Swedish election
that sounds dispiritingly like the report from the UK, above. [*Read
complete
article.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7ee2e7a964&e=003de9ccab)

**Readers’ Role**: ***Our readers — that’s you — are part of this
conversation. Submit contributions to *The Washington Socialist* at a
number of levels — send us nominee for “Good Reads” (they should be
available online so send links); send news and notices of activism;
submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*A Medley of Socialist Approaches to Climate
Crisis*](http://dsadc.org/a-medley-of-socialist-approaches-to-climate-crisis/)

Wednesday, October 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist*&lt;&gt;October 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

When DSA members from around the country joined the People’s Climate
March in New York on Sept. 21, we represented just a fraction of the
socialist contingent.    No doubt in part to recruit new members at the
march, but also in response to the growing gravity of global climate
change and emerging popular movements to stop it (or at least slow its
advance), many different currents on the U.S. left have recently been
addressing climate change and environmental crisis.   Here are the
platforms and/or statements of several groups, “ecosocialist” and
otherwise, that DSA supporters should find worth considering.

“Our Planet, Our Movement,” from *Against the Current*, newsletter of
the Trotskyist group Solidarity.   Not only the growing climate crisis,
but also number of other environmental indicators show our current
civilization to be unsustainable, the editors of *Against the Current*
warn.  Added scientific research and technological innovation is needed
to head off catastrophe, yet “green capitalism” cannot provide a real
solution in the end.  Socialist transformation will ultimately be
required.   In the meantime, however, “the crisis cannot ‘wait for the
revolution’ if we’re going to avoid the collapse that could well become
irreversible — according to a mounting mass of scientific evidence —
within a few decades.”

Arguing that “the struggles to halt environmental destruction and
capitalism itself must be waged simultaneously, and inextricably,”
*Against the Current* goes on to address the essential role of organized
labor in the fight for sustainability as well as the painful dilemmas of
workers who are currently employed by industries contributing to climate
catastrophe.  The statement goes on to provide electronic links to
leftist activists who have proposed ways to address the economic needs
of coal miners, auto workers and other employees of such anti-green
industries while working to achieve the long-term solidarity needed to
make climate activism successful.  To access the statement, click here: 
[*http://solidarity-us.org/site/node/4233*](http://solidarity-us.org/site/node/4233).

Howie Hawkins, Green Party Platform for Governor of New York.  In the
Sept. 21 People’s Climate March, supporters of the New York Green Party
and Howie Hawkins’ campaign for governor were easy to identify from
their bright green shirts, and in certain stretches along the route,
there seemed to be a lot of them.  Hawkins and the New York Green Party
have an elaborate political platform addressing many urgent issues of
importance to the left, with planks on raising the minimum wage,
reinvesting in public housing, providing better mass transit for all New
Yorkers, preserving net neutrality, resisting efforts to privatize
public education, and many other issues besides.

In addressing environmental problems, Hawkins and the New York Greens
identify several priorities, including a Green New Deal for the state, a
ban on fracking and the closing of existing nuclear power plants, the
achievement of a zero-carbon emissions energy system by 2030 in part
through subsidies for distributed power systems and small-scale solar
and wind power, a phasing out of large animal feedlots, the labeling of
GMOs in food, a ban on antibiotics in animal feed, a ban on
neonicotinoid pesticides that contribute to Colony Collapse among bees,
and efforts to support small farmers in New York State through
restrictions of corporate acquisition of farm land and economic and
technical assistance for small producers.  For more on the platform,
click here: 
[*http://www.howiehawkins.org/platform*](http://www.howiehawkins.org/platform).

“Building an Ecologically Sound and Socially Just Economy,” by Fred
Magdoff, *Monthly Review* magazine, September 2014.  Fred Magdoff, a
long-time leftist with close ties to the Monthly Review school of
Marxism, also is a professor emeritus of plant and soil science at the
University of Vermont and has written frequently in MR on environmental
topics, including the ecology of nutrient circulation within healthy
soils.  He is author of the Monthly Review Press book *What Every
Environmentalist Needs to Know About Capitalism. * In this article,
Magdoff focuses heavily on capitalism’s addiction to exponential
economic growth and the incompatibility of such growth with
environmental sustainability.  In a green and socially just economy, he
writes, “Once socially determined basic human needs (material and
non-material) are met – and after deciding how much is enough – the
economy stops growing with only neutral or positive side effects for
society.”

Some other principles in Magdoff’s list include creating a society of
small, relatively self-sufficient communities, having workplaces and
residences be closer so as to minimize transportation needs, moving
towards a more bicycle-friendly society, and agricultural production
“based on soil and above-ground habitat management” that makes plants
better able to defend themselves against insects and disease.  In
Magdoff’s ideal society, “integrated animal-crop farms will be
encouraged,” with farm animals treated humanely and their manure, along
with human wastes to the maximum degree feasible, being recycled back to
the soil.   The green society also will require shorter average work
weeks, the elimination of planned waste in the economy, much greater
income equality, and an education system that encourages compassion,
cooperation, reciprocity and sharing, egalitarianism and a reverence for
the natural world rather than their opposites.   At WS press time
Magdoff’s article is available for free at
[*http://links.org.au/node/4078*](http://links.org.au/node/4078).

“Change the System, not the Climate,” from the Committees of
Correspondence for Democracy & Socialism.  This is a 28-page booklet
produced collectively by some 24 different CCDS members, with 15 pages
devoted to a somewhat scholarly overview of current climate trends and a
discussion of economic and technological forces driving them. 
Unfortunately the text is not free of typos, but the booklet is visually
appealing with some striking photographs and charts.  Sources cited
include Bill McKibben’s .350 org, NASA, the IPCC, the Royal Society of
London and the International Energy Agency, along with Al Gore and Marx.

Among the recommendations in the final section of the booklet are
support for a global fossil fuels divestment campaign, as endorsed by
McKibben and Archbishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa, among others; a
focus on green job creation, as proposed at the World Congress of the
International Trade Union Confederation in May 2014; radical reductions
in the U.S. military budget to free up money for investment in green
jobs, and “social control of capital up to and including nationalization
of the energy and finance sectors of the economy.”   CCDS lists several
more immediate priorities as well, including fights against tar sands
oil production and natural gas fracking and the promotion of organic
agriculture.  The booklet briefly endorses the Green Party’s “Green New
Deal” also, including its call for a carbon use tax coupled with
“robust” efforts to protect the incomes of working class and poor people
who would otherwise be hurt by such a tax.   Single copies are available
for \$2.50 apiece, with cheaper rates for bulk orders, from CCDS
Treasurer, 6422 Irwin Ct., Oakland, CA 94609.

“Capitalism, Socialism, and Sustainability,” by Mark Schaeffer of DSA. 
As posted by Mark Schaeffer to DSA activists before the Sept. 21 climate
march, this outlines a possible democratic socialist approach to
tackling global environmental crisis while also addressing growing
economic inequality.   It can be printed out as a four-page 11.5” by 8”
brochure for ease of distribution to other marchers.

On one point, the DSA brochure is arguably contradictory:  it quotes a
warning from Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. against civilizations collapsing
by deciding to make necessary changes “too late,” yet in another passage
it states that a socialist society can be achieved through nonviolent
struggles, “continuing over generations,” to expand democratic rights,
institutions, and social relations “within a mainly capitalist system.” 
The brochure adds, “These centuries-long struggles continue in our time
on many fronts…‘  Whether most green activists believe the fight to curb
climate change can extend over “generations” and “centuries” without
producing global catastrophe is unclear.  The bulk of the brochure,
however, outlines a number of paths to a green future that socialists
can pursue immediately.  Stating that “business as usual is leading
toward catastrophic collapse of the natural systems that billions of
people depend on for their livelihood,” Schaeffer writes that achieving
a sustainable economy will require “fundamental political and social
change on every scale from household to planet,” adding:  “System change
can only be achieved by uniting movements for social justice, peace, and
human rights as well as environmental justice and stewardship.”

Issues around which such activists can unite, the brochure indicates,
include the creation of green jobs, especially through government-funded
modifications to existing infrastructure; the fight for fair trade; the
uprooting of environmental racism so that minority communities are not
forced to be dumping grounds for toxic waste; campaigns for reproductive
choice and access to family planning; fights for healthier workplaces;
reductions in the working week and year; expanding and improving public
transit; democratic local and regional planning; improved public
education; the promotion of “diverse forms of economic democracy”
including co-ops, worker-owned enterprises and community-owned
agriculture; and campaigns to block fossil fuel and other hazardous
technologies, including via divestment campaigns. \[*Editor’s note: on
Sept. 30 Schaeffer sent some updates to the DSA Activist list for
inclusion in future versions. Those changes may be included in the
document referenced here by the time readers see this article.*\] 

To access the brochure, click here:  
[*http://www.dsausa.org/capitalism\_socialism\_and\_sustainability*](http://www.dsausa.org/capitalism_socialism_and_sustainability).

[*GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS OCTOBER
2014*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-october-2014/)

Wednesday, October 1st, 2014

 

***The Washington Socialist*&lt;&gt;October 2014**

Sometimes the most interesting phenomenon is the good read that pops up
in the MSM, or mainstream media as the slang puts it. Here’s an NYT
piece with some punch, and a groping sense of class conflict in
separatist efforts:

[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/19/upshot/scotland-independence-vote.html?ref=business&abt=0002&abg=1*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/19/upshot/scotland-independence-vote.html?ref=business&abt=0002&abg=1)

Sam Pizzigatti’s “Too Much” blog for IPS always amuses with a portrait
of one or more greedhead moguls in his “petulant plutocrats” hall of
shame. This time (Sept. 29; search for it) his “In Focus” section is
headed “Why an Unequal Planet Can Never Be Green.” Read on…

[*http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html*](http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html)

Michael Bindner posted this on the Metro DC DSA Facebook page. It’s an
excellent and accessible roundup indicating that socialist practices are
related, and easily imaginable from, our everyday lives in an already
mixed economy; one of the pathways to altered consciousness

[*http://www.huffingtonpost.com/andrew-wilkes/towards-a-socialist-ameri\_b\_5898248.html*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/andrew-wilkes/towards-a-socialist-ameri_b_5898248.html)

* *

Swedish voters recently dumped a right-wing government, as expected –
but the news, by this account from the *International* *Journal of
Socialist Renewal*, is not all that good, with neoliberal hegemony
splitting the Swedish left.

[*http://links.org.au/node/4074*](http://links.org.au/node/4074)

Population is a key element in both managing social provision and
combating climate change. Yet, a writer for Grist observes, we talk
about it last, or never. How to change that…*\
*[*http://grist.org/climate-energy/the-obvious-relationship-between-climate-and-family-planning-and-why-we-dont-talk-about-it/*](http://grist.org/climate-energy/the-obvious-relationship-between-climate-and-family-planning-and-why-we-dont-talk-about-it/)

*Portside*, an invaluable outlet for left analysis and opinion, presents
a profile of Vermont’s Sen. Bernie Sanders, whose gestures toward an
insurgent presidential candidacy have fired up progressives all over the
map. The origin of this piece may surprise.

[*http://portside.org/2014-07-14/could-socialist-senator-become-national-brand*](http://portside.org/2014-07-14/could-socialist-senator-become-national-brand)

***AND NO SOONER DID WE RELEASE THIS MONTH’S NEWSLETTER THAN GREAT NEW
READS KEPT CASCADING DOWN… SO WE WILL KEEP UPDATING HERE…***

The new economy offers the freedom to do without security in the
“Freelancer Economy” — how good a deal is that? *Portside* links to a
fine “Working In These Times” post…

[*http://portside.org/2014-09-29/freelancer-economy-here-should-we-celebrate*](http://portside.org/2014-09-29/freelancer-economy-here-should-we-celebrate)

[*Local Town Meeting on Ferguson, Mo. Killing Addresses Problems and
Solutions*](http://dsadc.org/local-town-meeting-on-ferguson-mo-killing-addresses-problems-and-solutions/)

Wednesday, October 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2014**

*By Ingrid Goldstrom*

“We are sick and tired of being sick and tired” was a mantra of those
who gathered on August 28, to mourn the loss of Michael Brown and
others, and to call for ***systemic/ structural/institutional***
 change.

The Institute of the Black World 21^st^ Century (IBW) held this 
national town hall meeting “Ferguson and Beyond,” cosponsored by Busboys
and Poets (where the event was held), the Institute for Policy Studies
and radio station WPFW.  Frustration was palpable in the largely
African-American, multigenerational crowd.  Among the speakers were Dr.
Ron Daniels, President of IBW; Barbara Arnwine, President of the Lawyers
Committee for Civil Rights; Jasiri X, Hip Hop artist and activist; Danny
Glover, actor and activist (who participated by telephone); and the very
warmly welcomed Dick Gregory, comedian and activist,

Leaders of a broad coalition of civil rights groups (including, but not
limited to, the National Urban League, NAACP, Rainbow Push Coalition, A.
Philip Randolph Institute) issued a unified action statement of 15 steps
to promote reform and stop police abuse.  Among these were calls for
federal investigations and reviews by the Department of Justice,
specifically on the killing of the unarmed Brown, and more generally on
all police killings, as well as the use of excessive force and racial
profiling.  They noted that closing the gap on data collections to
monitor these activities is essential.  They also recommended the use by
police officers of Body Worn Cameras (BWCs) and dash cameras in police
vehicles.  Calls for community policing were also heard.

Activists of the civil rights movement in the ‘50s and ‘60s have been
re-traumatized by Ferguson’s example of federal military weapons in the
hands of law enforcement – the militarization of the police.  
Particularly painful for older civil rights activists was the fact that
Brown’s body was left in the street for four hours, reminiscent of how
people who were lynched were left in the streets.

Of late, there seems to be incremental progress in some places in some
of these arenas; for example, the Justice Department is moving forward
with some investigations and locally DC will be testing body cameras.

White DSAers need to reach out to our African American and Latino
sisters and brothers about what we can do to help them achieve the goals
they set forth as we all struggle for social justice.  For example, in
anticipation of the November 4^th^ elections, can we help both locally
and in state-wide races?  One thing we can do as individuals is to be
vigilant about submitting reports on police misconduct that we see.

Of course, there is a longer and more fundamental struggle at hand –
confronting racism wherever it exists.  Local metropolitan area DC DSA
members can avail themselves of the opportunity to join others to speak
openly and honestly about issues of race at the monthly Busboys and
Poets A.C.T.O.R. (A Continuing Talk on Race).   See their website
([*www.busboysandpoets.com*](http://www.busboysandpoets.com)) for more
information.

[*Taking Stock – Moving Forward: Jobs with Justice Steering Committee
Meeting*](http://dsadc.org/taking-stock-moving-forward-jobs-with-justice-steering-committee-meeting/)

Wednesday, October 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2014**

*By Kurt Stand  *

After a summer hiatus, DC Jobs with Justice steering committee met on
September 4 with a wide range of activities planned for the coming
months.  Activities that will build on struggles engaged in – and
victories won – during the past year.   And it is important to note the
nature of those victories; for they speak to the core values of the
coalition – justice for workers.  Over the past year, JwJ played an
active, leading role in the successful fight for a wage theft law.
Although wage theft (forcing people to work uncompensated overtime, not
paying full wages due and the like) has always been technically illegal,
previously there was no mechanism to allow those cheated to claim what
had been stolen from them.  Another important victory was  DC City
Council passage of a sick leave bill; meaning workers no longer can be
fired for taking time off when ill – or when their children are sick, 
And a third victory was won with passage of a graded minimum wage
increase, to be implemented over the next few years.

Given the realities of poverty and injustice within DC, however, JwJ is
looking forward to greater gains in the future.  Thus  although DC  —
alongside Montgomery and Prince George’ s County – was in the vanguard
of the initial successful drive to increase local minimum wage in the
absence of federal action (due to Republican recalcitrance) other cities
have now taken that battle further by pushing for (and in some
instances) winning an increase to \$15.  That number is now the local
goal and a new campaign is underway to that end.  So too is a campaign
to include tipped employees, who labor with a minimum wage of \$2.77 per
hour.   Because of the strength of restaurant and hotel industries in
the District, these workers have been excluded from previous gains.  JwJ
is supporting a Restaurant Opportunities Center initiative to launch a
public campaign to ensure that workers now excluded will be included in
any future increase.  JwJ is also supporting the work of Respect DC,
which is fighting to improve pay and working conditions of Walmart
workers, focusing at the two stores recently opened in Washington.  And,
in addition to supporting the efforts of coalition members, JwJ will
soon announce the launch of a campaign of its own focusing on hours and
schedule for the ever-growing number of contingent, part-time,
sub-contracted workers that are features of our local (and of the
national) economy.

Two members of DSA took part in the meeting.  Other organizations
represented included:  American Federation of Government Employees
(AFGE) Local 12, Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance (APALA),
Communications Workers of America (CWA) Local 2336, Employment Justice
Center, GW Roosevelt Institute (student organization), International
Socialists Organization,  Laborers International Union of North America
(LIUNA), One DC, Restaurant Opportunities Center (ROC-DC), Service
Employees International Union (SEIU)  Local 32bj, United Food and
Commercial Workers (UFCW)  Local 400, the Washington Peace Center, and
Washington Teachers Union (WTU).

 

[*The UK’s parties are Tweedledum and
Tweedledee*](http://dsadc.org/the-uks-parties-are-tweedledum-and-tweedledee/)

Wednesday, October 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2014**

** ***By Ingrid Goldstrom*

Alumni of the London School of Economics and Political Science heard a
detailed update on the current state of British politics from two
current LSE faculty Aug. 29.

Professors Tony Travers and Simon Hicks from the LSE Department of
Government in London spoke at Washington, DC’s Meridian House, saying
that they believe that today there exists “little ideology” in British
policies; that there is no substantive difference between the Labour
Party and the Conservative Party (does this sound familiar re the
Democratic and Republican parties in the US?).

Despite an economic growth rate of 3.2% per year, there is growing
inequality in Britain.  Yet, it is not debated whether austerity is the
way forward – the Labour and Conservative parties simply differ on the
question of how fast to continue in that direction.

Like DSA, the Labour Party is part of the Socialist International (SI)
so this is a disappointment to DSA members.

Travers and Hicks identified three events which will have profound
impact over the next three years: (1) the September 18 Scottish
independence referendum; (2) the British elections in 2015 (at the
moment they think the Labor Party will narrowly edge out the
Conservatives); and (3) a possible 2017 referendum about British
membership in the European Union.

Party loyalty has dropped sharply. In the 1950s, 97 percent of the
British population identified with one of the major parties; today only
65 percent do so.  This fact makes for major uncertainty in upcoming
events.  Of great concern is the rise and success of the United Kingdom
Independence Party (UKIP) described in Wikipedia as a [*“Eurosceptic
right-wing political
party”*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UK_Independence_Party) advocating
an exit from the UK’s relations with the European Union and a five-year
moratorium on immigration.  Their policies essentially make them the
British ideological equivalent of the Tea Party in the U.S. although
they operate as a separate party in a parliamentary system.

One of the three major events Travers and Hicks discussed – the
September 18 referendum on Scottish independence from the United Kingdom
– has since resulted in a “no” vote for independence.  The professors
predicted that this would be the case, as well as the very close vote.
They also predict that once the older, post-World War II generation
literally dies out, younger generations of Scottish voters will vote in
an independent Scotland.

For now, those interested in British politics should keep a keen eye on
the future, more incremental steps toward greater power for Scotland and
the ripple effect this has on the UK as a whole, and to the upcoming
2015 elections and the role of UKIP as it potentially gains previously
“safe” Labour seats.
