***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from June 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the June issue of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-june-issue-of-the-washington-socialist-2/)

Wednesday, June 3rd, 2015

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the June issue of the *Washington Socialist*,** the monthly
email newsletter of [*Metro-DC Democratic Socialists of
America*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8661a8026c&e=bd065fbd2a).

Memorial Day has recently come and gone and the summer is officially
under way. It is often the season of activism – school’s out and people
feel footloose. Demos and other actions will be popping up like solar
flares, and often with as much warning, so recipients of this newsletter
might expect a few email alerts between issues.\
Speaking of issues (of this newsletter), we’ll go to our habitual summer
publishing schedule, with the next issue coming out Bastille Day (July
14) and the next one after that our Labor Day issue.

DSA nationally and locally is adjusting to the unusual circumstance of
having a self-identified socialist – Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont –
running for the Democratic presidential nomination. The local’s
preliminary discussions on related activism are detailed in an article
in this issue and other discussions are likely to come into play at any
or all of the get-togethers for June.

**HAPPENING IN JUNE**: Metro-DC DSA has a scheduled membership meeting
Sunday, June 14 \[Editor’s Note: Date CORRECTED from email newsletter\]
at the Watha T. Daniel/Shaw branch of the DC library, 1630 7^th^ St. NW,
across the street from the Shaw/Howard Metrorail station on the
Green/Yellow lines. Former Tennessee Valley Authority executive and
public-power gadfly Dave Freeman is scheduled to speak on “The Past and
Future of Public Power in the US” – a previously scheduled talk that was
wiped out earlier this year by extreme winter weather. The still-pending
decision about Exelon’s takeover of Pepco gives a local edge to this
discussion. [*Current details
*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/222946390/)are always on our
Meetup site. The Steering Committee meets at 1 p.m. and the full
membership meeting begins at 2 with presentation and discussion ending
at 3, followed by a half-hour member business meeting.\
Our [*Socialist
Salon*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=3a1abd04c2&e=bd065fbd2a)
discussion group meets Thursday, June 18, 6:30 p.m. at Hunan Dynasty,
215 Pennsylvania Ave. SE, close to the Capitol South Metrorail station
on the Orange/Blue/Silver lines.\
The [*Socialist Book
Group*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=df02fdc984&e=bd065fbd2a)
meets Sunday, June 21 to discuss Terry Eagleton’s 2011 book, *Why Marx
Was Right*. The gathering is 3 p.m. to 5 at the Kogod Courtyard of the
National Portrait Gallery, 8^th^ and F Streets NW. The book, a modern
classic of explanation, has been
[*reviewed*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=e04c021792&e=bd065fbd2a)
in this newsletter.
[*Twice*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c58c7544c1&e=bd065fbd2a).\
Finally for June, a [*DSA Happy
Hour*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=67bc6e974d&e=bd065fbd2a)
is set for Wednesday, June 24, 6:30 p.m. at the Luna Grille near Dupont
Circle Metro, 1301 Connecticut Ave. NW. It’s themeless; the name
explains everything.\
Topics for the June Salon are in formation at press time for the
*Washington Socialist.* Current information will be posted on the
[*Meetup
site*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=19cccb7a84&e=bd065fbd2a)
as soon as they are completed.

**Metro-DC DSA elected a new steering committee** at its May membership
meeting, a roughly annual turnover with continuity. Returning are
committee members Jose Gutierrez (co-chair), Andy Feeney, Ingrid
Goldstrom, Bryan Kovalick and Kurt Stand. Returning also is former SC
member Dr. Carolyn Byerly. New to the SC is Jonathan Phipps, a national
member and activist living in suburban Baltimore who said he will spend
considerable time getting a covalent Baltimore-area local under way with
support from both national DSA and the Metro-DC local.

At the same membership meeting, the members agreed to form several
committees/working groups. A revival of a feminist working group on
women’s issues will be led by Goldstrom, Byerly and Ross Templeton.
Another. a new initiative, is on gentrification – the severe effects on
neighborhoods and on the affordability of housing that come from
rampant, uncontrolled real estate speculation. Communities are ravaged,
deformed and displaced by rent increases as landlords upgrade to attract
new, affluent and younger tenants, most of whom have little connection
to the communities they are joining. The resource-starved DC government
has embraced the tax advantages of letting developers have their way in
nearly every ward (including not-so-benign neglect of the city’s poorest
areas, like Ward 8).  The results for neighborhoods have been
catastrophic. A socialist perspective on gentrification is close to the
surface; it is inherent in communities’ grasp of the real authors of
their misery. Andy Feeney will coordinate the development of the working
group on gentrification and housing issues.

**In This Issue**\
**Money!** It’s a hit… etc. Bill Mosley signals that the annual round of
local dues solicitation is about to head out for mailboxes and inboxes.
Because Metro-DC DSA gets no funds from the national organization, our
activity and activism depends on participation – to include the
financial. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8cddd6f288&e=bd065fbd2a)

**Neither rain nor…** The US Postal Service continues to squeeze its
unions and the four postal unions, not always in step with one another,
are banding together to fight a longstanding but increasingly severe
privatization threat.  Andy Feeney provides the details. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=26b2e47f2a&e=bd065fbd2a)

**First stage Bern…** How can Metro-DC DSA support the presidential run
of Sen. Bernie Sanders, a self-described socialist, and help build
public awareness and understanding of socialism in the process. There
are election laws to be mindful of. The local had an early discussion of
the careful footing required at the May Socialist Salon. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=11770b33c1&e=bd065fbd2a)

**Climate justice and a diverse movement…** A budding coalition that
aims to diversify the largely white environmental and climate justice
movement met in May to find common ground on strategy and bridge
cultural gaps. Andy Feeney recounts the discussion and the players.[
*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=609f154249&e=bd065fbd2a)

**Class action…** In a supposedly class-free US society, classes
actually have distinct roles in innovation and entrepreneurship, with
those differences reinforcing inequalities of power and, of course,
wealth. Daniel Adkins takes an unusual perspective on this aspect of
economic society. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=bbf67a36c8&e=bd065fbd2a)

**The future according to *Washingtonian*…** the slick magazine for the
well-off and aspiring well-off lays out a future for the capital city’s
development that is pretty chilling – unrestrained, sky’s-the-limit
urban developers, sprawling suburbs and squeezed-out workers. Andy
Feeney takes a skeptical view of this real-estate porn and compares it
to a more thoughtful perspective coming from the social justice
community. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6da3dd9fba&e=bd065fbd2a)

**Laborfest’s best**… the annual worker-interest film festival featured
several documentaries on great and small struggles – the farmworkers
(great and long) and a trio of shorts dealing with Walmart workers,
CETA-style tree planting and federal workers. All instill the
consciousness of struggle, Kurt Stand says, in their own way. [*Read
complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ae09cd69be&e=bd065fbd2a)

**Tomorrowland brief…** The new George Clooney film from Disney gets a
quick, very quick, look from Daniel Adkins. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ba685ce5cb&e=bd065fbd2a)
but don’t blink…

**Good Reads for June**… links to articles you may have missed; many are
about the topic of the day, the Sanders Campaign, but others carry us
back to the 1980 campaign and “Waiting for Teddy,” or about pricing
public parks out of the reach of much of the public. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7b33306b86&e=bd065fbd2a)

**You can read these and other past articles in the *Washington
Socialist* on our website where they are archived,**
[***dsadc.org***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ce3b27c763&e=bd065fbd2a)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*Climate Activism in a New Shade of Green: DC Conference Aims to Unite
Struggles For Sustainable Energy, Full Employment, Racial
Justice*](http://dsadc.org/climate-activism-in-a-new-shade-of-green-dc-conference-seeks-to-unite-estruggles-for-sustainable-energy-full-employment-racial-justic/)

Monday, June 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; June 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

** **The politics and science of global climate change were high on the
agenda on Saturday, May 9 as about 50 activists from up and down the
East Coast met at the University of the District of Columbia’s Dave
Clarke School of Law to hear environmentalists including Bill McKibben,
Lester Brown, Dr. Michael Dorsey of the Joint Center for Political and
Economic Studies and Rev. Lennox Yearwood of the Hip Hop Caucus (which
has made climate activism a priority) discuss the growing urgency of the
climate issue and ways of addressing it.  Representatives of the
People’s Climate Lobby, the Sierra Club and the Nuclear Information and
Resource Service were present in the audience.

Yet climate change was not the only issue under discussion. The
conference, organized by the new populist coalition People Demanding
Action (PDA), with the sponsorship of the Hip Hop Caucus, Progressive
Democrats of America (PDA), Social Security Works and the People’s
Climate Lobby, was specifically designed to forge new cooperative links
between largely white-led climate activism organizations and other
groups, largely led by people of color, working on other social and
economic issues.

In addition to featuring presentations on climate change, accordingly,
the agenda included a speaker on chronic unemployment and the Conyers
full employment bill (HR 1000) as one answer to it.  Still additional
speakers addressed the challenges of black and progressive voter
disenfranchisement, environmental racism, mass incarceration, the
desperate social conditions still affecting Native Americans on many
Indian reservations, and the struggle for statehood for the District of
Columbia.

People Demanding Action billed the conference, which extended over May
8-10, as “Building an Inclusive Climate Movement to Create Community
Power,” and one of the main panel discussions focused specifically on
achieving greater diversity in the climate action movement.   Panelists
included

-   Leslie Fields, a black attorney and former international director of
    Friends of the Earth-US, who currently serves as the National
    Environmental Justice Director for the Sierra Club;

-   Jacqui Patterson, Director of the Climate Justice Initiative of the
    national NAACP and a cofounder of Women of Color United, which last
    year partnered with the NAACP to organize a Women of Color for
    Climate Justice Road Tour;

-   Mark Magaña, the President and CEO of Green Latinos and a board
    member of the League of Conservation Voters; as well as

-   Dr. Gabriela Lemus, Executive Director of the Progressive Congress
    (an independent nonprofit organization allied with the Progressive
    Caucus in Congress) and a former director of Policy and Legislation
    at the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC).

Additional prominent speakers at the conference included Mustafa Ali, a
founding member of the Office of Environmental Justice at EPA and
current Acting Senior Advisor to the Administrator for Environmental
Justice; Jay Winter Nighthawk, originator and host of “The American
Indian’s Truths, Nightwolf, the Most Dangerous Show on Radio” and a
member of the national advisory board of Progressive Democrats of
America; and Barbara Arnwine, president and executive director since
1989 of the national Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law.

Still other speakers of note included Ted Glick, policy director for the
Chesapeake Action Network; Vermont state senator Ben Ptashnik, a former
chair of the Vermont Public Interest Research Group and a veteran
advocate for human rights and environmental protection, as well as a
cofounder of Vermont Businesses for Social Responsibility; Prof. Joel
Rogers, an academic from the University of Wisconsin who has written
widely on American politics and public policy and has advised such
progressive NGOs as the Apollo Alliance and the Center for a New
Democracy; Rev. Glencie Rhedrick, a pastoral minister  in Charlotte, NC
and a former president of Mecklenburg Ministries, a religious coalition
of approximately 100 communities of faith; and Joel Segal, a former
senior legislative aide to Michigan’s Rep. John Conyers and a former
chair of the Congressional Universal Health Care Task Force.

Perhaps the most dominant voice over the course of the 12-hour
organizing session on May 9, however, was Rev. Yearwood of the Hip Hop
Caucus.  A retired U.S. Air Force Reserve officer and a Baptist
minister, Rep. Yearwood is the founder of the Hip Hop Caucus and has
been active in involving communities of color in environmental and
climate change activism for several years.  He also was key to
organizing the Gulf Coast Renewal Campaign after Hurricane Katrina in
2005, which blocked early rounds of illegal evictions of Katrina
survivors from temporary housing and supported United Nations “right of
return” policies for former New Orleans residents displaced by the
hurricane.

A coauthor with Tom Weis of a 2014 “Zero Emissions Manifesto for the
Climate Justice Movement,” Rev. Yearwood has argued that “because the
climate crisis threatens all life on Earth, it is first and foremost a
moral issue,” and that the moral urgency of the crisis “requires a
rainbow coalition of    people – reflecting the diversity of our great
nation – coming together to solve it.”  He has also argued, in a 2015
article in EcoWatch announcing the PDA conference on building a more
inclusive climate movement, that “if the climate movement does not
become more inclusive, the goal of transitioning from fossil fuels to
clean energy will not happen.”

The modern environmental movement, despite having achieved “incredible
victories for the public good,” is still largely rooted in predominantly
white and rather elite communities and cannot command the massive social
and political support needed to push the government and the economy
toward the “green industrial revolution” needed to head off climate
disaster, Rev. Yearwood also has stated. “The movement needs to expand,
and to do so we need to re-frame the issue of climate change to make it
an everyday, every person issue.”

A major theme that Rev. Yearwood repeatedly returned to on May 9 was
therefore that the largely white-led climate activism movement needs to
become increasingly sensitive to communities of color, and along with
several other black ministers at the event, Rev. Yearwood seemed to feel
that it is therefore essential for climate activists to frame the
climate issue in terms of morality, with less focus on scientific
detail.  Several other speakers also noted that in some cases, to engage
ordinary people in the fight, especially in communities of color,
climate activists might need to focus on related issues that affect
people’s everyday lives, such as high rates of asthma from exposure to
pollutants from coal-burning power plants, or the childhood exposure to
lead paint, and the mental damage this causes, that contributed to
Freddy Gray’s death at the hands of police in Baltimore.

Jay Winter Nighthawk, in introducing his remarks on poverty and social
crisis in Native American reservations, stated that he is involved in
defending Indian rights because “God put me here to do a job.  I’m not
leaving here until I’ve done that job.”

Similarly, in commenting on the political struggle to preserve democracy
against rightwing billionaires like the Koch brothers, Rev. Yearwood’s
associate T.C. Muhammad, also active in the Hip Hop Caucus, cited the
Koran in stating the “the coal companies, the Koch brothers, I view them
as midgets … I don’t view the Koch brothers … as being in control.”  The
nature of human beings is to seek justice, T.C. Muhammad added, and the
nature of human beings also is to seek peace: “That’s why struggle will
continue until there is justice along with peace.” He also argued that
Mother Earth will defend herself … “regardless of me, Mother Earth is
going to win,” which means climate activists can take up the fight for
change “believing that we *can* win,” an essential belief if individuals
are going to be serious about the struggle.

Just how much the rhetoric and the political strategies of the white
environmental activists attending the conference will change in response
to such appeals is obviously unclear at *Washington Socialist* press
time.  It seems obvious that for some climate activists, appeals to God
and the alleged inevitability of victory over the fossil fuel companies
may be a little alienating.  But the coming together of climate
activists and advocates for other urgently important causes at the
conference, under the organizing eye of long-time activist PDA executive
director Andrea Miller, was intriguing and provocative.  Conceivably, it
may bring about significant changes in the largely white-based
environmental movement and help catalyze the formation of a new
multi-issue populist alliance in years to come.

[*Creativity by Class*](http://dsadc.org/creativity-by-class/)

Monday, June 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; June 2015**

*By Daniel C. Adkins*

If human society is to be sustainable, it is time we evaluated how our
various social-economic groups use their creativity to change society or
not.  Below is a quick view of different social class contributions.

The middle and upper middle classes cover a wide area but have created
the crown jewels of our networked society.  In addition to maintaining
educational systems, small businesses, and much else, I claim that they
have created the new corporations of our technological world.  The
companies – Microsoft, Apple, Google, and others – have been created by
middle-class students enthralled by the opportunities of their
disciplines, especially the technological ones.  Steve Wozniak is the
son of a defense electronic engineer who taught his son electronics so
well that the Woz was able to build one of the first personal
computers.  Bill Gates learned coding so well that he was able to start
a business.  Steve Jobs got enough college under his belt that he was
able to build a computer that was important in a cultural way as much as
a business way.  The Google guys created a company in the process of
implementing their search algorithms.  The companies that were created
eventually grew beyond their initial technologies and often have used
business techniques that are monopolistic.  These techniques can be seen
as part of capitalist market reality and “creativity”.  Markets are not
stable and a successful company will try to control its market unless
regulated not to do so.  The values of these corporations often include
supporting a sustainable future.  Apple aims to be carbon neutral in the
near future. The middle classes fulfill the professional and small
business needs, often work for a sustainable future, and their
creativity has created major corporations.

The blue collar or working class not only fulfills the needs of
productions and services, but also has been the focus of the Quality
movement.  In older production practices workers were seen to be
programmable by management instructions.  The Quality movement’s goal is
to capture the workers’ mental and physical efforts to create more
efficient systems.  Some firms do utilize their workers’ suggestions and
even reward them.  In other industrialized countries such as Germany
there are workers councils that let management and unions plan together
and formally use workers’ creativity.  With the roll-back of unions in
the US this joint structure is used very little.  However much of the
U.S. liveability  (8 hour day) and welfare state came from the working
classes’ union history.

Much of the lower classes’ creativity, however, is spent in just
surviving.  Sadly the economy is so rough on them that most do not seem
able to thrive or rise.  The latest news about the police shooting of
young black men has noted that some police forces have used the law to
raise money for themselves and have so limited mobility of locals that
it is difficult for them to keep a job.  We had hoped Jim Crow was gone,
but it has just been institutionalized.

The 1% is well-educated and well-financed.  There are divisions between
old money and new members (innovators from the middle class). The 1%’s
creativity can be seen as it uses its money to lobby Congress, rewrite
laws in its favor, and use politics, statistics, culture, and psychology
to manipulate elections to maintain and expand its corporations’
profits.  Congress has given business interests so much influence that
the AFL-CIO and environmental organizations are not even given access to
the proposed trade laws affecting Europe and Asia.

The 1%’s creativity has also gone into optimizing its cash flow from
production and distribution of goods on a worldwide basis.  The Wal-Mart
example of this does provide low commodity prices, but at the cost of
wiping out local businesses and paying such low wages that many of their
employees need public assistance, making Wal-Mart the nation’s largest
welfare queen.  Over the last 40 or so years the top 3% has gobbled up
productivity so much that it owns 90% of US wealth.  This level of
inequality has not been seen since the Great Depression.  A new report
from the Organization for Economic Cooperation (major industrialized
countries) links inequality with slower national economic growth.  It
states, “In societies experiencing higher inequality, individuals might
become less and less able to move outside the earnings class in which
they were born.”  The financial sector has been so influential that it
almost created a depression after dismantling laws designed to help
prevent that outcome.  Much of the climate denying comes from the fossil
fuel industry, and it buys politicians who are united in making money
the way they have always made it.  The 1% is leading us toward a less
sustainable and less democratic future.

[*DEVELOPERS’ DREAM: Our Region’s Real Estate Future, as Washingtonian
Magazine Envisions
It*](http://dsadc.org/developers-dream-our-regions-real-estate-future-as-washingtonian-magazine-envisions-it/)

Monday, June 1st, 2015

** *The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; June 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

If you think rising rents and gentrification pressures in the DC area
are intense now, just wait.  That’s the unstated subtext of an ambitious
April 2015 special report on the Metro region’s real estate future in
*The Washingtonian,* a local glossy magazine for the economically
comfortable.  With the cover title *Capital of the FUTURE,* this
*Washingtonian* issue bears the subheading “The Stunning Changes Coming
to Our Region – And What They Mean for How (and Where) You’ll Live,
Work, and Play,” and for some upscale readers, that is a more or less
accurate indication of the report’s contents.

But what senior editor Marisa M. Kashino and a half-dozen contributing
writers then provide is mostly what the Metropolitan Washington Council
of Governments and a number of prominent local development companies
have in mind for this area, without much sense of what the changes
envisioned might mean for low-wage Washington area workers, the
homeless, many existing communities of color, and indebted recent
college grads now working at relatively low-wage positions with local
coffee shops and other retail establishments.  What *The
Washingtonian’s* editorial staff has provided instead is an apparently
well-researched glimpse of what the developers’ plans and existing
trends will look like at the 30,000-foot level, for a species of
economic giants.  And that’s interesting.

*The Washingtonian* unfortunately doesn’t make its content available
online except to paid subscribers.  Therefore, DSA members and other
local progressives who are interested in the magazine’s forecasts will
need to buy copies of the April issue, at about \$5 each, or consult the
magazine in your local libraries.  But here are a few highlighted
predictions:

-   The population of Washington DC itself is projected to grow from
    about 659,000 people today to nearly 900,000 by the year 2040,
    according to the Council of Governments.  Supposedly, the number of
    jobs available in the District will grow at a rate of between 6,640
    – 10,143 positions per year between now and then.  The higher rate
    of job growth would overtax the local housing supply and cause the
    District to run out of available land on which to build housing,
    creating a growth bottleneck.

-   To meet growing demand for housing, the city probably will be able
    to convert some existing office space to residential housing, as
    local professional workers increasingly engage in telecommuting from
    offices in their homes in the suburbs and leave office space vacant
    for this kind of conversion. However, this won’t be enough to solve
    the housing crunch.  Therefore, the city will need to alter or
    eliminate the Height Act, which currently restricts DC buildings to
    heights of no more than 130 feet.  There will be a need to protect
    the existing views of important monuments, *The Washingtonian*
    concedes, but when it comes to many other areas in the city, “the
    Height Act has got to go.”

-   Senior editor Kashino sees a number of potential blocks to future
    business development in the District, notably a NIMBY (Not In My
    Back Yard) syndrome aggravated by the existence of Advisory
    Neighborhood Commissions in the city, which help NIMBY groups to
    frustrate development plans.  Add in the potential interference of
    the National Capital Planning Commission, Kashino writes, and “You
    get a cumbersome, business-unfriendly building process.”  To cure
    this problem, the city needs to move toward a more “commonsense”
    zoning process that will allow for more mixed-use developments that
    facilitate greater residential densities.

-   Also, Kashino suggests that local developers might emulate a major
    Long Island developer who has used “crowd-source planning” to win
    over or defeat the NIMBY groups, by giving pro-development residents
    a greater chance to comment on proposed projects electronically,
    without having to sit through long evening meetings where
    anti-development activists may dominate the proceedings.

-   Outside of the District itself, *The Washingtonian* cites
    projections by local planners that envision extremely rapid
    population growth through 2040 in distant Stafford County and
    Spotsylvania County, Va., where a generation of “New Ex-Urbanites”
    are expected to settle in the future in hopes of finding large
    building lots and single-family homes.  On the other hand, the
    cities of Arlington and Alexandria, right across the Potomac from
    the District, are expected to experience population losses – with
    Arlington losing about 14 percent of its existing population and
    Alexandria almost 4 percent of its population in the
    planning period.

-   Next to Stafford County (projected population growth of about
    141 percent) and Spotsylvania County (projected growth of 137
    percent), Frederick County, Va., is expected to have the fastest
    population growth over the next two and a half decades, growing by
    almost 78 percent to some 146,000 people.  Those Virginia and
    Maryland counties closer to the District should see modest
    population growth, ranging from a low of roughly 9 percent to a high
    of about 21 percent, and counties in the intermediate zone between
    the “ex-urban” counties and the inner ring should see intermediate
    growth rates as well.

-   According to an article by *Washingtonian* staffers Michael J.
    Gaynor and Emma Foehringer Merchant, in distant bedroom communities
    outside of the District, “bigger footprints that come with more
    green space” will continue to have an appeal to suburban families,
    while in the District itself, increasing numbers of residents will
    live in “micro-units” – compact apartments offering as little as 344
    square feet of space for their inhabitants. Some “micro-units” of
    this sort have been built already, and more are on the way.

-   *The Washingtonian* also discusses a number of major real estate
    projects, both approved and merely proposed, that prominent
    development companies may build in the region over the next few
    decades.  These include (a) a Southwest waterfront project, the
    first stages of which could be complete in a few years’ time, that
    would add three hotels and some 200,000 square feet of retail space
    to the area; (b) a proposed park to be established along the
    District’s 11^th^ Street Bridge, providing a pedestrian-friendly
    link to an area around the old St. Elizabeth’s Hospital grounds in
    Southeast, where “the District has plans for a technology hub
    anchored by Microsoft;” (c) a \$66 million plan to redevelop the
    White Flint area along Rockville Pike in Montgomery County, Md., to
    include a 1-mile boulevard with pedestrian walkways along with 9,800
    new housing units; (d) the proposed addition of a new span to the
    American Legion Bridge to reduce traffic congestion; and (e) a
    proposed “Burnham Place” building complex that Amtrak and the
    Akridge development firm are thinking about constructing over the
    current Amtrak rail yard behind Union Station.  If approved and
    built, it supposedly would provide 3 million square feet of new
    commercial and residential space in the area and link to the ongoing
    redevelopment of the H Street Corridor.

* *For more details of *The Washingtonian’s* projections, readers of the
*Washington Socialist* really should buy or borrow the magazine’s April
issue, which also includes a long, thoughtful article on the spectacular
rise of Tysons Corner as a major employment hub and an overview of an
ambitious plan to convert it into a livable, walkable residential and
commercial area with a population of up to 100,000 residents by the year
2050.  According to Washingtonian writer Luke Mullins, the proposed
40-year development plan for Tysons, by providing extensive access to
public transit for area residents, could even convert this
traffic-clogged “Edge City” into a carbon-neutral area over time –
unless powerful economic forces not wholly under the control of the
developers throw the entire transformation into disarray, as they might.

For local socialists and other Metro DC activists concerned about the
high human costs of gentrification, a useful and instructive contrast to
*The Washingtonian’s* rosy futuristic vision is offered by a far less
glossy publication, the Spring 2014 Peace Letter of the Washington Peace
Center.  With the title “Housing is a Human Right:  Making Sense of DC’s
Housing Crisis,” the Peace Letter makes note of the “mass displacement
of life-long residents and a subsequent spike in family homelessness”
that have attended the recent influx of high-income residents into the
District and the rising rents and gentrification pressures they have
caused.

An article in the Peace Letter by Will Merrifield on “The Cost of
Gentrification” notes that as of early 2014, a DC resident would need to
earn \$27 an hour for a 40-hour week to afford a typical two-bedroom
apartment in the city at “Fair Market Rent.” Someone earning the minimum
wage, which was \$8.25 an hour in early 2014, would have needed to work
more than 130 hours a week, 52 weeks a year, to afford the same
apartment.

Between 2000 and 2014, Merrifield’s article adds, the number of low-cost
rental units in the District shrank by 50 percent, while there was a
tripling in the number of rental units costing more than the median
rent.  Meanwhile the District’s waiting list for households seeking
subsidized housing held some 70,000 names in 2014, and had been closed
to new applicants.  The result was that in 2014, and continuing through
today, large numbers of low-income families and individuals –
particularly older residents, people of color, and households headed by
single mothers – have been squeezed out of the local housing market.

Promises by local politicians, including DC’s new Mayor Muriel Bowser,
to address the problem through the construction or promotion of
“affordable housing” also appear to have little chance of solving the
housing crisis.

This is because, as the Peace Letter noted last year, the DC government
generally defines “affordable housing” as housing that can be afforded
by households enjoying between 50 percent and 80 percent of the Area
Medium Income, or AMI.  Since the Metro DC region includes five of the
wealthiest counties in the United States, the AMI here in 2014 was
around \$107,000 annually.  However, in the 2010 Census, roughly 20
percent of the District’s population was recorded at living below the
poverty line, at \$22,314 a year or less.

In early 2014, again according to the Peace Letter, the average
household income in Ward 8, the city’s poorest ward, was around \$32,000
a year.  It follows that in the District under current housing policies,
it is possible for the city or local developers to build “affordable”
housing that a fifth of the population can’t afford.  The upshot, as
Erin Burns noted in a graphic outline of the gentrification crisis in
the Peace Letter, is that between 2000 and 2010, the District lost
around 40,000 African-American residents to real estate displacement.

Conceivably, the brave new world of real estate development envisioned
by *The Washingtonian* could eventually end this region’s gentrification
crisis and provide new houses for the growing local population of
homeless persons, but it seems more likely that this kind of real estate
development will make the crisis worse. As Marxist geographer David
Harvey has written in his recent book *Seventeen Contradictions and the
End of Capitalism,* speculative and not-so-speculative investments in
land, rental housing, residential housing construction and other kinds
of fixed assets offer capitalists a seemingly attractive alternative to
investments in new industrial manufacturing and other forms of economic
production in times of prolonged economic stagnation.  As it happens,
the US economy and indeed much of the world economy today are caught in
what looks like a prolonged period of stagnation and/or slow growth. 
Meanwhile the U.S. Federal Reserve and other central banks, in an effort
to spur economic growth and prevent the stagnation from worsening, are
keeping down interest rates and flooding the world economy with
relatively cheap money – thus making it apparently cheap and easy for
real estate developers to borrow large sums for big development schemes,
even speculative ones.  Could this be one of the less obvious economic
forces driving both gentrification and large-scale commercial
development in the Metro DC region, while rising rents are pushing
low-income families in Ward 8 and elsewhere toward homelessness?

**Additional Resources for This Story:**  Patrick Madden and Julie
Patels, investigative reporters for radio station WAMU, have compiled a
report called “Deals for Developers:  Cash for Campaigns” that outlines
financial connections between local real estate development interests
and politicians in the District of Columbia.  To access the report,
click here: 
[*https://apps.npr.org/deals-for-developers-wamu/*](https://apps.npr.org/deals-for-developers-wamu/)
.

WAMU reporter Martin Austermuhle, with the assistance of several other
WAMU staffers, has recently produced a three-part investigative report
on the “flipping” of houses and rental properties in the District by
unscrupulous investors.  The series can be accessed here:
[*http://wamu.org/projects/house-flipping/\#/part1?scrollTo=part1\#part1*](http://wamu.org/projects/house-flipping/#/part1?scrollTo=part1#part1)r
,
[*http://wamu.org/projects/house-flipping/\#/part2?scrollTo=part2\#part2*](http://wamu.org/projects/house-flipping/#/part2?scrollTo=part2#part2)
, and
[*http://wamu.org/projects/house-flipping/\#/part3?scrollTo=part3\#part3*](http://wamu.org/projects/house-flipping/#/part3?scrollTo=part3#part3)

[*Documenting Workers’ Lives at DC Labor Fest: Films About Life and
Labor*](http://dsadc.org/documenting-workers-lives-at-dc-labor-fest-films-about-life-and-labor/)

Monday, June 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; June 2015**

*By Kurt Stand*

The DC Labor Fest – sponsored by the Metro Washington Labor Council and
supported by numerous other labor and social justice organizations —
provides a forum for numerous forms of cultural productions with a focus
on working people that is rare in our corporate-driven culture
industry.  The films, music, art and walking tours open a window on the
experiences, ideas, aspirations of individual workers and of their
collective struggles. Two film events shown on successive evenings, May
11 and 12, speak to the larger achievement of the festival as a whole.

**Fighting For Our Lives** was the first of these – a film re-released
after 40 years, it was originally made as a vehicle for the United Farm
Workers in the midst of a bitter dispute with growers in 1973.  The film
made by Glen Pearcy has the immediacy of a documentary made in the heat
of battle.  The UFW, formed in 1965, led a strike and national boycott
campaign that led to successful grape contracts in California by 1969. 
This meant enormous real improvements in living and working conditions
for those who labored in the fields, meant being treated by employers
with the respect and dignity that should be the right of all.  Union
strength was growing and expanding throughout the fields, a circumstance
that agricultural employers – powerful and wealthy – were not willing to
accept.

Efforts to organize farm workers had periodically been attempted since
the late 19^th^ century; all defeated by a combination of vigilante and
police violence, court injunctions, employer-induced division amongst
the workers and the ever-present tool of racism.  It was just such a
combination which meant that farmworkers (alongside domestic workers)
were excluded from US labor law.  And so it was a playbook that was
again brought into use as the film documents — employers used court
injunctions, (then) corrupt Teamster union vigilantes, racist local
police departments and other measures to break the strike.  Although the
will of the workers was not broken, one can see the change of mood on
the picket lines from an exuberant defiance to a grimmer determination. 
The film ends with UFW founder and president Cesar Chavez speaking to
strikers as they prepare to go across the US and Canada to build support
for a boycott (the film itself was made as part of that campaign).

The film gives us a glimpse of a campaign, but it also allows us to see
something of the lives of the workers, giving a picture of people who
then cease to be faceless.  The three brief clips of movies still in
production shown as part of the Bread & Roses: Filmmakers’ Works in
Progress at Busboys and Poets in Takoma Park –**Creative Feds**, **City
of Trees, Can’t Take it No More** – are documentary films which give
voice to working people facing vastly different circumstances, yet
workers trying to make their voices heard, asserting their dignity and
sense of self.  As the name implies, **Creative Feds** (directed by
Erica Ginsberg and Leon Gerskovic) is about federal workers.  Beginning
with clips from newsreels and news shows that depict government
employees as faceless bureaucrats who waste public money, this movie
both reminds viewers of the vast range of works they in fact do, and
humanizes them by allowing a glimpse of their pursuits apart from their
jobs.  The workers (all from different agencies) express their
creativity through music, theatre, painting and thus as full human
beings contrary to popular stereotype.  Stereotypes of a different sort
are used to paint an image of the supposed uselessness of people who
live in blighted neighborhoods – in those neighborhoods west of the
river in DC that gentrification has left behind.  Often depicted with
thinly veiled contempt or patronizing “sympathy,” they are rarely seen
as individuals with stories worth knowing, opinions worth hearing,
dreams worth acknowledging.  **City of Trees** works to counter this.
 Directors Lance and Brandon Kramer document what happens when a
non-profit makes use of stimulus money at the height of the recession by
hiring local unemployed workers to plant trees in a neighborhood park. 
For the change that is wrought is not only about the acquisition of job
skills, or about community engagement to make a nearby park safer, it is
also about the affirmation and sense of self-worth those involved gain
when given a kind of opportunity otherwise denied.

A different focus comes in **Can’t Take it No More**, which is a film
about Walmart workers who are taking part in the struggle to force the
company to treat employees with fairness, a commodity Walmart does not
have on its shelf.  Like all union campaigns, the workers’ fight is
about better pay, conditions, benefits – and is also about the dignity
and respect to which all workers are entitled, whether they be
professionals, janitors, retail clerks or, as seen before, if they work
on farms and vineyards. The focus of this documentary, however, is not
on the Walmart workers’ campaigns or rallies, but rather on the lives of
some of those most active in this social justice movement.  Knowing
something of the people engaged, who they are, what they experienced,
what they believe, allows viewers to understand the human beings behind
the Walmart workers fight for economic justice.  All three of these
films share in common with each other a focus on persons rather than
campaigns or overarching issues – but that makes them just as, if not
even more, political than films that speak of issues abstracted from
human personality.  And, indeed, corporate power recognizes that –
Michael Bain and Kiley Kraskouskas, directors of **Can’t Take it No
More,** are involved in a legal fight with Walmart which is seeking to
prevent the filmmakers from using the company’s name in the picture’s
title.  Making connections between work come around full circle, the
screening of works in progress – of films not yet completed – put
something of the craft of filmmaking on display and spoke to the growth
of documentary film making in the DC Metro area.

At the same time, these films, in their own way, speak to labor
struggles.  Federal workers will find their livelihoods and conditions
under threat if Republican regain the White House in 2016.  The stimulus
ran out and job programs such as those depicted in **City of Trees**
remain the exception not the rule.  And Walmart certainly will not give
up its anti-union stance, will not stop squeezing its labor force
without a bitter and determined fight.  Understanding such challenges
made viewing **Fighting for Our Harvest** all the more poignant and
powerful.  The UFW strike/boycott campaign of 1973-75 was only partially
successful as the union was losing ground under assaults from all
sides.\*  The political mood in the country had shifted, farmworkers
were an early target as business and the right began a counter-offensive
from which we all still suffer.  But not all was lost.  Conditions in
the fields are better than they were in 1965.  The UFW remains an active
force in California, as does the Farm Labor Organizing Committee (FLOC)
in the south and Midwest, the Coalition of Immokalee Workers (CIW) in
Florida and as do other local and regional groupings.  And the fight for
justice, against racism and exploitation continues to draw strength from
the victories and defeats of those who came before.

Perhaps too solidarity is growing.  The beauty of the three
documentaries shown as part of Filmmakers’ Works in Progress – indeed
the importance of DC Laborfest as a whole –is that it simultaneously
demonstrates the diversity of experience and outlooks of workers across
our communities while also pointing to the underlying commonality of all
working people.  Only out of such shared understanding can the
solidarity of labor be made into the force needed to win social
justice.  An extraordinarily moving sequence in **Fighting for Our
Harvest** is in a sequence that moves from funeral to funeral of two
workers murdered during the dispute, a sequence that moves from a Muslim
funeral for an Arab farmworker to a Catholic funeral for a Mexican
farmworker of the prayers and music of the one to the prayers and music
of the other.  What we see and hear is an expression of shared sacrifice
that serves as a shared expression of hope for a better life in the here
and now.  That is the underlying meaning of Laborfest as indeed it is
the underlying content of the labor movement when it is true to itself –
and in that content lies our own hope for tomorrow.

*\*A correction was made here by the author June 1.*

[*Good Reads for June*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-june/)

**Good Reads for Socialists As June Kicks Off Summer**

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; June 2015**

A mini-memoir in *Salon* by a socialist who was present at the creation…
the story of how Michael Harrington came close to becoming a
presidential candidate in 1980 while “Waiting for Teddy” …  this one
made the rounds of the DSA activist listserv

[*http://www.salon.com/2015/05/08/the\_socialist\_revolt\_that\_america\_forgot\_a\_history\_lesson\_for\_bernie\_sanders/*](http://www.salon.com/2015/05/08/the_socialist_revolt_that_america_forgot_a_history_lesson_for_bernie_sanders/)

No doubt, this is going to be the Bernie Edition of “Good Reads” (and
maybe not the only one). A former activist in Boston DSA weighs in on
one of the big within-the-left debates enlivening this new landscape…
it’s on the website *Common Dreams* …
[*http://www.commondreams.org/views/2015/05/21/only-america-false-dichotomy-between-movement-building-and-electoral-politics*](http://www.commondreams.org/views/2015/05/21/only-america-false-dichotomy-between-movement-building-and-electoral-politics)

The Bernie campaign as seen by a DSA activist in Colorado, writing in
the *Boulder Weekly.*
[*http://www.boulderweekly.com/article-14431-the-socialist-democrat.html*](http://www.boulderweekly.com/article-14431-the-socialist-democrat.html)

A dissenting view from *Jacobin* (dissenting in some respects from other
Jacobin writers) on the long-term outcome of a Bernie Sanders campaign:
https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/05/bernie-sanders-president-socialist-primary/

Greta Christina, on *Alternet*, fingers common contradictions that folks
carry around with them almost effortlessly when claiming social
liberalism and fiscal conservatism.
[*http://www.alternet.org/news-amp-politics/7-things-people-who-say-theyre-fiscally-conservative-socially-liberal-dont*](http://www.alternet.org/news-amp-politics/7-things-people-who-say-theyre-fiscally-conservative-socially-liberal-dont)

**&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;An extended take:
Pimping Out Public Parks – and Hurting Low Income Visitors –in Response
to State Budget Cuts**.

For well-to-do people who kind of like nature, but hate doing without
essential electronic devices, the Washington State park system has
created a fine new camping opportunity.  According to an opinion piece
by outdoor writer Christopher Solomon in the May 24 *New York Times,*
the state for the last two years has allowed a private concessionaire,
“Pampered Wilderness,” to offer high-end camping opportunities in its
Millersylvania State Park where, for about \$500 per weekend, visitors
can enjoy “amenities like flat-screen TVs or microwaves and
fireplaces.”   Starting this Memorial Day, Solomon adds, Washington
State also is offering “glamping” (for glam-camping) at the enormously
popular Moran State Park on Orca Island, “a jewel of Washington’s park
system,” where tenting opportunities will run to as much as \$220 a
night for a minimum two-night stay on the weekends, with an extra \$9
needed if campers want coffee delivered in the morning.  The state park
authority is reportedly considering whether to offer Wi-Fi to campers,
too.

Offering “glamping” to campers willing to pay more runs the risk of
creating a class-divided camping experience for public park visitors,
Solomon frets.  Nevertheless, Washington State is turning toward it for
two reasons.  One is a fashion trend in private campgrounds that’s been
promoted by chic travel publications, including the travel section of
the *Times* itself; the second is that the Washington state park system,
which serves some 300 million visitors annually, has lost 79 percent of
its public funding in six years, forcing it to lay off one-third of its
employees.  State promotion of “glamping” and the higher fees it can
bring is one way to recover needed revenues.

Nationwide, Solomon reports, allocations for state parks by state
legislatures have fallen by \$250 million since 2008, “forcing parks to
cut operations or turn to other sources of money.” Unfortunately this
defunding process – which promises to make parks unaffordable to
low-income Americans who may need them most – is still underway.  In
Wisconsin, notes Solomon, Republican Gov. Scott Walker “has proposed
cutting all state funding for parks,” recommending that they rely
instead on higher user fees and other existing revenues.

For more details, see Christopher Solomon, “Our Pampered Wilderness,” at
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/24/opinion/sunday/our-pampered-wilderness.html?\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/24/opinion/sunday/our-pampered-wilderness.html?_r=0)
.

*–Andy Feeney*

The White House released in May a short (11 pages) compendium of
findings about the national security implications of climate change.
Dispassionately, we hear that “The pressures caused by climate change
will influence resource competition while placing additional burdens on
economies, societies, and governance institutions around the world. Many
governments will face challenges to meet even the basic needs of their
people as they confront demographic change, resource constraints,
effects of climate change, and risks of global infectious disease
outbreaks. These effects are threat multipliers…”

The pdf is at
[*h**ttps://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/National\_Security\_Implications\_of\_Changing\_Climate\_Final\_051915.pdf***](https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/National_Security_Implications_of_Changing_Climate_Final_051915.pdf)

Longtime DSA leader and feminist scholar Chris Riddiough spoke to our
Socialist Salon a few months ago about the Chicago Women’s Liberation
Union, one of the root sources of feminist thought and action stemming
from the 1960s. The website for that history has recently had
significant updates, Chris reports, and invites a visit. It’s at
[*http://www.cwlu.org/*](http://www.cwlu.org/)

And another detailed take:

**How the Other Half Dies:  Infant Mortality Rates in the District. **
According to a recent report by the advocacy group Save the Children,
death rates for infants in Washington DC’s poorest ward, Ward 8, are
roughly 10 times those in Ward 3, its wealthiest.  Writing about the
Save the Children report in the May 5 *Washington Post,* reporter
Abigail Hauslohner observes that District infant mortality rates on
average have fallen significantly over the last decade and a half –
dropping from about 15 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1999 to just 7.9
in 2012, the last year for which firm data were available.  In 2013, a
preliminary report prepared by former Mayor Vincent Gray pegged the
infant death rate at 6.6 per 1,000 live births – an “all-time low for
the city.”  But the figures cited by Save the Children indicate an
infant mortality rate in Ward 8 of 14.9 per 1,000 live births in 2012,
comparable to rates in San Salvador and Phnom Pehn, Cambodia. In Ward 3,
in contrast, the rate for 2012 was 1.2 deaths per 1,000 live births –
comparable to rates in Stockholm and Tokyo, and “on par with the lowest
infant mortality rates worldwide.”

Save the Children found a likely cause for the discrepancy, Hauslohner
reports:  about half of Ward 8’s children are living in poverty, and the
majority of the households in the ward with children are headed by
single mothers.  The stresses these mothers face during pregnancy in
paying their bills and holding down their jobs probably contribute to
the higher rates of premature births in the ward associated with greater
infant mortality. For more details, see Hauslohner’s article in the May
5 *Post* at
[*http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/dc-politics/poor-dc-babies-are-more-than-10-times-as-likely-to-die-as-rich-ones/2015/05/04/27200040-f268-11e4-b2f3-af5479e6bbdd\_story.html*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/dc-politics/poor-dc-babies-are-more-than-10-times-as-likely-to-die-as-rich-ones/2015/05/04/27200040-f268-11e4-b2f3-af5479e6bbdd_story.html)
.  The Save the Children report can be found at
[*https://www.savethechildren.net/state-worlds-mothers-2015*](https://www.savethechildren.net/state-worlds-mothers-2015)
.

*–Andy Feeney*

[*Metro-DC DSA Members Discuss Prospects, Pitfalls in Supporting Sanders
Campaign*](http://dsadc.org/metro-dc-dsa-members-discuss-prospects-pitfalls-in-supporting-sanders-campaign/)

Monday, June 1st, 2015

**A *Washington Socialist* Report**

Metro-DC DSA members enlivened by the presidential candidacy of Sen.
Bernie Sanders gathered at May’s Socialist Salon to work on the details
and constraints involved in individual and group support for the effort.

Sanders, who announced his candidacy April 30, has identified himself as
a democratic socialist frequently in his political arc from mayor of
Burlington, Vermont to US representative and then senator from that
state. DSA members see big advantages in the introduction of the term
into presidential politics – advantages for the political discourse
itself, up to now capped at a largely neoliberal level and bottomed on
the knuckle-dragging rhetoric of Tea Party patriarchy. Socialist
organizations will also benefit from the entry of socialist perspectives
on perennial issue areas such as inequality, health, income security and
education.

The Supreme Court’s decision in the *Citizens United* case changed the
landscape in which DSA (and other nonprofits) can conduct electoral
activity. [*\[DD1\]*](http://dsadc.org/2015/06/#_msocom_1) Though DCDSA
held a very successful fundraiser for Sanders when he ran for the Senate
in 2006, in presidential races a lot more distance is required to
protect the organization’s status. Our express advocacy, however, no
longer has to be done solely through our PAC (but we cannot coordinate
with his campaign). Until some legal questions are clarified, for
instance, DSA will not do fundraising for Sanders as an organization,
though members may do so as individuals. Members should feel free to
encourage Democratic primary voters to support Sanders and explain this
is a DSA position.

Members at the Salon agreed that activities both promoting the Sanders
campaign (and emphasizing his leftmost policy proposals) and
simultaneously raising the visibility of DSA as an organization were
optimal. The group also discussed the fact that there are issues on
which some DSA members might not agree with Sanders. Members agreed to a
separate discussion in how to approach other Sanders volunteers on the
differences between the Senator and DC-Metro DSA members.

The Metro DC DSA steering committee chose two members to be point
persons in this effort. David Duhalde and Ross Templeton are both
campaign veterans and will aim to navigate the local through the reefs
and shoals of Federal Elections Commission (FEC) regulations.

Members at the Salon discussed the DC political terrain and what
long-standing local groups might be allies. One veteran of the 1988
Jesse Jackson primary campaign, Kurt Stand, urged that the spirit of
this one, likewise, should be “to win” not just pull a major candidate
leftward, because much of Jackson’s non-core support was galvanized by
that spirit.

The national office has sent some preliminary guidance to locals about
what they can legally do to boost both Sanders and DSA.

DSA’s support for Sanders has been explicit. The national organization
website [*announces*](http://www.dsausa.org/weneedbernie) **“Democratic
Socialists of America (DSA) strongly supports Senator Sanders as the
strongest candidate for President of the United States.”** As always,
the support includes critique: DSA national director Maria Svart, in her
guidance to locals, said **“**Our political goal is to generate support
for Bernie through visibility and momentum, and do what we can to
influence his campaign to have better perspective and platform around
institutional racism. Our organizational goal is to GROW DSA so that
after the election, we are significantly stronger and can continue
fighting for democratic socialism.”

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="2.34375in"}

*Metro-DC DSA members at the May Salon. Photo: Nicole Hohler*

Svart noted that there are a fair number of things that locals can do as
locals, including creating forums or other events with titles like “What
is Democratic Socialism and Why Does Bernie Support It?” Other moves
include contacting other independent organizations that might be
interested in the campaign, including “People for Bernie,” a group led
by Occupy veterans.

But, she emphasized, “We are running an UNCOORDINATED campaign. This
means we are not communicating with the Bernie Sanders official
campaign. If individual DSAers show up to a Bernie campaign event in a
DSA T-shirt, that’s OK, but not coordinating with the campaign in any
way.”

In particular, the organization will not, for the present, do any
official fundraisers. In a May 24 update in response to questions from
locals around the country, Svart emphasized “No one should organize a
fundraiser as DSA. You should not have DSA literature. You should not
introduce yourself as a DSAer if you give remarks. You should not use a
DSA list to invite people.”

Future local membership meetings and salons will develop DSA’s range of
action in the Sanders campaign as more guidance appears.

 

[*Postal Unions Set “Grand Alliance” Against Ongoing Efforts to
Privatize
USPS*](http://dsadc.org/postal-unions-set-grand-alliance-against-ongoing-efforts-to-privatize-usps/)

Monday, June 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialis*t &lt;&gt; June 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

The U.S. Postal Service and its unionized workforce have been under
attack for more than a decade by rightwing Republicans who apparently
hope to shrink or eliminate its operations over time and transfer its
functions to private industry.  To this end, a Republican Congress in
2002 passed legislation ordering the USPS to prefund its pension fund
liabilities some 75 years into the future, thus guaranteeing that the
Postal Service, almost regardless of its revenue stream, will run large
yearly budget deficits.  Then, in the name of reducing the budget
deficits, conservatives have called for the closing of rural post
offices in many places, the shutting of regional mail-processing
centers, the elimination of Saturday mail service and the transfer of
postage stamp sales to private retailers, including Wal-Mart and
Staples.

This year, under the leadership of the American Postal Workers Union
(APWU), one of four different unions representing USPS employees, the
embattled postal workers and their allies have started to fight back
against the privatizers.  Earlier this year, APWU president Mark
Dimondstein announced the formation of a “Grand Alliance” of labor
unions and other national organizations devoted to preserving the Postal
Service and even potentially expanding its functions.

And on May 14, APWU members and supporters from the Grand Alliance
rallied in 130 locations across 45 states, DC and Puerto Rico in support
of a new contract for the APWU that would slow the privatization drive
and support the establishment of new USPS operations, notably through
“postal banking” services that would give many Americans an alternative
to payday loan companies and private check-cashing services.

In the Metro Washington, DC area on May 14, about 25-30 union members
and a few allies gathered outside the Brentwood mail processing facility
near the Brookland shopping center to support the APWU contract
negotiating team.  For approximately two hours, demonstrators chanted in
favor of a new contract and “union power” in the general sense, at one
point marching onto the shopping center’s parking lot to demonstrate
outside of Giant (which is unionized) and Home Depot (which is not)\*. 
After a few minutes of chanting, we were told by an annoyed manager of
Home Depot that we were allegedly on company property and needed to
leave, which inspired some spirited argument by several feisty women in
the APWU contingent.  However, on the advice of the local union
president, we did leave to return to the front of the Brentwood facility
for remarks by union officials.  We also distributed dozens if not
hundreds of postcards to passing motorists and local shoppers addressed
to Postmaster General Megan J. Brennan, expressing support for a strong
Postal Service and for the APWU’s contract demands.  Most people after
signing the postcards returned them to the union to convey to Postmaster
General Brennan; a few took the cards with them to sign and home and
mail in independently.

How effective the May 14 rallies and the postcard campaign will be in
persuading USPS management to accept the union’s demands remains to be
seen.  The APWU’s national contract expired on May 20 with no agreement
between the union and the Postal Service.  On May 21 APWU president
Dimondstein issued a press statement saying the contract talks have been
extended as the negotiators seek to resolve differences over “economic
issues.”  For now, Dimondstein indicated, the old contract terms remain
in effect; if the APWU cannot reach agreement with the Postal Service on
a new contract, it will likely resort to mediation and/or arbitration in
search of a better deal.

Regardless of the outcome of this year’s contract talks, however, the
APWU’s effort to build a Grand Alliance of supporters for a healthy
Postal Service and good USPS jobs seems to be off to a promising start. 
In March, when the Alliance was first announced, it boasted some 65
member organizations; however, there now are 75 national organizations
on the membership list.  These include the AFL-CIO, other postal worker
unions and a host of other national and international unions, as well as
the Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance, the Black Woman’s Roundtable,
the Coalition of Labor Union Women, the Campaign for America’s Future,
the Catholic Alliance for the Common Good, the Center for Media and
Democracy, the Center for Rural Affairs, the Congressional Hispanic
Caucus, Consumer Action, Democracy for America, the Gamaliel Network (a
religious justice coalition), Greenpeace USA, the Jewish Labor
Committee, the Ms. Foundation for Women, National Action Network, the
National Coalition on Black Civic Participation, National Consumers
League, the National Council of Churches, the National Organization for
Women, National People’s Action, People Demanding Action, People for the
American Way, the Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc., Public
Citizen, the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, the Sierra Club, United Students
Against Sweatshops, and Vote Vets Action Fund, among other groups.

The support that Alliance members have expressed for a strong Postal
Service going forward has had some influence on Postal Service
management in the contract talks, Dimondstein indicated in his May 21
statement, and the postcards to Postmaster General Brennan are helpful. 
APWU members and supporters should keep collecting signatures and
sending them in to the USPS as talks continue.

For more information contact the union website at http://www.apwu.org/. 
For more information on the Grand Alliance and how you or your
organization can contribute to it, go to its website at
[*http://agrandalliance.org/*](http://agrandalliance.org/) and
[*http://agrandalliance.org/national-organizations/*](http://agrandalliance.org/national-organizations/)
.

*\*Home Depot is an*
[**ESOP**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Employee_stock_ownership_plan)*,
an employee stock ownership corporation, though of the type that offers
employees little or no say over company management – just stock
options.*

[*Renew Your Commitment to Socialism in the Nation’s
Capital*](http://dsadc.org/renew-your-commitment-to-socialism-in-the-nations-capital/)

Monday, June 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; June 2015**

*By Bill Mosle**y***

** **Later this month you can expect to receive by e-mail and/or regular
mail a request that you renew your financial commitment to Metro-DC
Democratic Socialists of America.

Even if you pay dues to national DSA, the local chapter still needs your
assistance.  We receive no financial support from the national
organization, and our ability to carry on our work of providing a
socialist voice in the “capital city of the capitalist world” depends on
you.

Over the next 12 months we plan to continue our ongoing work as well as
take up new projects.  Among the latter, the Bernie Sanders for
President campaign provides an unprecedented opportunity to inject
socialist ideas into the mainstream debate.  Meanwhile, we will continue
to work with our allies for a \$15 minimum wage, to fight against police
brutality, and to support progressive candidates for local offices.  But
to do all of that, we need your financial support.

And we also need your ideas and participation.  Our mailing will include
a survey with questions about your ideas and priorities for the local
and how you might become involved, or more involved, in DSA activism. 
Please take a few minutes to complete the survey and return it along
with as generous a membership donation as you can afford.

So watch your mailbox and your inbox.  With your help, Metro-DC DSA can
be even more effective over the next year in injecting socialism into
the local marketplace of ideas.

[*Tomorrowland, a Film Mini
Review*](http://dsadc.org/tomorrowland-a-film-mini-review/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; June 2015**

*By Daniel C. Adkins*

**Tomorrowland** starts with a young boy going to the New York World’s
Fair to enter a jet pack into an invention competition.  Soon you see a
young woman getting a glimpse of the future but finding that future in
jeopardy.  The film is about saving the future.

**Tomorrowland** is inspired by Disney’s historical views of the future
as well as our current political intransigence on issues like climate
change.  The film veers into conspiracy as well as the reluctance of
authorities to accept new ideas.  The film demonstrates leadership by
women and girls and also shows more diversity than any film that I can
remember.  Although the plot is convoluted and has fun with animation, a
strong point is that if you want a different future than what we are
staggering toward, you need to get organizing for that future.  The film
should be great fun for families with children and a topic for
conversation.

The film’s weakness is that it focuses on individuals and not the social
movements that transform history.  The film’s success of promoting
organizing is undercut by wanting to organize only the elite, the best
and brightest.  Our success in winning the Civil War and World War II
was aided by bright people, but won by ordinary people.  There is a role
for everyone in changing history.

The film is showing at local AMC theaters in Arlington, Bethesda, DC,
Fairfax, Germantown, Hyattsville, Howard County, and Rockville.
