***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from February 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*DC Metro DSA’s February Newsletter: Short month, long
agenda*](http://dsadc.org/dc-metro-dsas-february-newsletter-short-month-long-agenda/)

Monday, February 2nd, 2015

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}**  **

**Welcome to the February 2015 issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
email newsletter of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America. **

Well, February. A shortish month of great psychic length.

Our **February membership meeting** is on a Sunday instead of a Saturday
– Sunday, Feb. 15 at 2 p.m. – and the speaker will be Dave Freeman, a
veteran manager of public power systems like the TVA and skeptic about
corporate power conglomerates like Exelon, which is lobbying to merge
with Pepco. It’s at the Watha T. Daniel/Shaw library branch, 1630 7^th^
St. NW, just steps from the Shaw Metrorail station. Our **Socialist
Salon** meets the following Thursday, Feb. 19, 6:30 p.m.  at Hunan
Dynasty, 215 Pennsylvania Ave. SE (closest to Capitol South on the
Orange/Blue Line). A discussion of the Syriza victory in Greece’s
parliamentary elections and the possible reverberations in the Eurozone
will be led by Simon Davis, a journalist who has lived in Greece. Our
local’s **Happy Hour**, unstructured discourse, meets Feb. 25 at 6:30 at
Bread & Brew, 1247 20th Street Northwest, Washington, DC near the Dupont
Circle Metrorail. Check our [*Meetup
site*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=b624d1ef19&e=003de9ccab)
for updates on all these events.

**OTHER FEBRUARY EVENTS**:

On Tuesday, Feb. 3 Busboys & Poets at 5th and K (Mount Vernon Triangle)
presents a talk on [*new scholarship on the Lawrence (Mass.) Textile
Strike of
1912*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=36395fb573&e=003de9ccab).
The talk by AU emeritus prof Jurg Siegenthaler is at 6 p.m.

Metro DC DSA is a cosponsor of [***Demystifying Syria – The Real Story
Behind
ISIS***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c20cf7471e&e=003de9ccab)**,**
a Feb. 21 forum in Rockville along with lead sponsor Peace Action
Montgomery. The bitter and largely misunderstood situation on the ground
in Iraq and Syria is outlined by some of the most well-informed analysts
in the U.S. Speakers are Phyllis Bennis of IPS, Raed Jarrar, policy
analyst for American Friends Service Committee, and Prof. Younes Benab
of Strayer University.   Questions, discussion and action plans to
oppose the violence are included. It’s Saturday, Feb. 21, 7:00 p.m. at
Unitarian Universalist Church of Rockville[*, 100 Welsh Park Dr.,
Rockville*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=42b7fb87b6&e=003de9ccab).

The Labor Committee of the DC NAACP is hosting an open meeting Feb. 23
to set the activities of the committee (the local NAACP’s labor liaison
group) for 2015, including work on minimum wage, labor solidarity
activism and the racial justice component of worker activism. It’[*s
Monday, Feb. 23 at 7 p.m.,
*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=62196f7313&e=003de9ccab)NAACP
Financial Freedom Center, Thurgood Marshall Center, Lower Level, 1816
12th St. NW, Washington, DC.

National DSA is offering a **DSA On-Line Virtual “Socialist School”
Course”** in “A Basic Introduction to the Thought of Karl Marx”  with
co-facilitators: Joe Schwartz, DSA Vice Ch, and Jared Abbott, Ch DSA
Strategy Comm. It is open to all DSA and YDS members relatively new to
Marx (how many of us does that cover? Maybe a few…).  The course will be
1.5 hours during the 7 – 10 PM EST slot on **Feb 24, Mar 24, April 28
and May 26.**  This will be a virtual discussion group.  There will be
either one or two sessions each night, depending on the number of
members who sign up. This 4 session mini-course is designed to help
socialists link theory with day to day activity.  We will cover a
manageable selection of Marx’s reading – and signing up for the course
means committing to doing these readings. **Space is limited: deadline
for signing up is Feb 17**.  Make the commitment to do all 4 sessions.
It’s open free to members, but of course [*becoming a
member*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=65dfa7a25e&e=003de9ccab)
is the easiest part. Then comes the reading. Register here:
[*http://www.dsausa.org/introduction\_to\_marxism*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f8df5b1712&e=003de9ccab)

Advance notice of a great-looking **academic event coming early in
March** at the University of Maryland, College Park (tx to Bob Feldman
and Ingrid Goldstrom for this tip): [*“**Organizing for Power and
Workers’ Rights in the 21st
Century”***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=0635ebe395&e=003de9ccab)
is being offered by the Center for the Study of the New American History
at UMCP Thursday, March 5. It’s a day-long session with the morning
devoted to today’s labor conditions and prospects (with UFCW’s Dan
Schlademan, the leader of the Walmart organizing campaign, on a panel
and a keynote by AFL-CIO Treasurer Elizabeth Shuler) and the afternoon
focused on  labor aspects of globalization and immigration, including a
panel with our DSA comrade (and Cal-Santa Barbara labor history prof)
Nelson Lichtenstein. [*The Southern Labor Studies
Association*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=efea0f46f2&e=003de9ccab),
a co-sponsor on this event, continues its conference down at GW for the
rest of the weekend.

**IN THIS ISSUE**\
One of our constant battles as socialists is to effectively define what
we mean by public and democratic management, vs. the increasing, but
well masked, manipulation of social and economic life by the private – 
the corporations and the wealthy ruling class. Public services that
affect everyone are under the radar that way, but sometimes events make
it plain.

-   That dichotomy hits the public head-on when ubiquitous services like
    public power are exposed as (for instance in Maryland, Virginia and
    the District) the corporate monopolies that they are. Public
    hearings are under way in Maryland and the District because a big
    corporate octopus – PEPCO– seeks to be absorbed by an even bigger
    corporate octopus, Chicago-based and nuke-heavy Exelon. [*A recent
    public hearing
    *](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=851a30797e&e=003de9ccab)on
    the proposed merger in DC is analyzed by *Andy Feeney*, and [*a
    similar hearing in
    Maryland*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=fdac11b21e&e=003de9ccab)
    by *Woody Woodruff.*

-   Events in Ferguson, New York and Cleveland that have highlighted
    excessive force and murder by law enforcement have brought many
    [*proposals for improving, constraining or making transparent the
    work of police
    *](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=3e1761938d&e=003de9ccab)in communities.
    *Bill Mosley* points out that the estrangement of poor and minority
    communities from police has deep historical roots – based in part on
    who police are really protecting and serving – and can only be
    alleviated by improving the conditions in those
    communities themselves.

-   The plague of [*gentrification in the District of Columbia
    *](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=972e762458&e=003de9ccab)has
    its base in social ills of long standing and has brought a vibrant
    new movement to contest it, *Andy Feeney* outlines. A coalition of
    new and existing DC movement organizations is bridging some old
    divides in the progressive community.

-   The former New York Times columnist Bob Herbert has taken a long
    look at the decline in social practice and in public policy that
    afflicts the US. *David Duhalde* reviews [*Herbert’s recent book*,
    Losing Our
    Way*.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6ae62692a5&e=003de9ccab)

-   Metro DC DSA’s January membership meeting hosted a longtime ally,
    Andrea Miller of Progressive Democrats of America. Her new parallel
    organization, [*People Demanding
    Action*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c1f5670dc0&e=003de9ccab),
    provides the local street heat dimension that Progressive Democrats,
    by their own charter, had to leave alone, and that new
    organization’s strategic tools can offer lessons to a more
    traditional left organization like DSA, as *Andy Feeney* outlines.

-   Allied [*activists from Maryland and the District
    *](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c3c8489ceb&e=003de9ccab)also
    brought strategic and tactical tools to the local’s monthly
    Socialist Salon. Activists Lucy Duff and Lisa Stand of Prince
    George’s County, Wally Malakoff of Montgomery County’s Progressive
    Neighbors, and neighborhood and electoral activist Eugene Puryear
    outlined the shape of activism in their respective jurisdictions. DC
    begins the term of another development-ensnared mayor, and
    Marylanders face a surprise Republican governor who has little
    relationship to the two large counties bordering DC. *Woody
    Woodruff* recounts the discussion.

-   A Republican-controlled Congress finds one area of agreement with
    President Obama on trade, and their agreement could bring economic
    and climate disaster to workers in the US and hard-pressed people in
    the impoverished global South. [*The Trans Pacific
    Partnership (TPP)*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8e7c9cf266&e=003de9ccab)
    could enable corporate dominance – “insurance against democracy” for
    businesses and corporations, one activist says. *Andy Feeney*
    updates readers on the TPP fight and what it could take to win.

-   The Maryland General Assembly pits its Democratic supermajority
    against the new Republican governor, and one hopes sparks would fly
    (though much conflict might be kabuki posturing considering the
    pro-business bent of both parties in ostensibly Deep Blue Maryland).
    Meanwhile the new governor has stocked his agencies with the same
    wrecking crew that made the Ehrlich administration such a disaster
    for the state. *Woody Woodruff* has a few observations about[ *the
    first weeks of  Maryland’s
    Assembly session.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=b9d9d7379a&e=003de9ccab)

-   [*Good
    Reads*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=00931d13b0&e=003de9ccab)
    include the usual suspects – corporate greed, bipartisan
    skullduggery, danger to the planet and the occasional heroics from
    the Left – an especially rich assortment this month, just the thing
    for weather that keeps us indoors.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*Beneficiaries Line Up to Praise Exelon-Pepco Merger; Ratepayers Not So
Much*](http://dsadc.org/beneficiaries-line-up-to-praise-exelon-pepco-merger-ratepayers-not-so-much/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2015**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Comments from the public in Prince George’s County on a merger of two
giant corporate utilities added up to near-uniform support and praise –
mostly from nonprofit groups that had benefited from the corporations’
largesse in the past and clearly hoped for even more.

A virtual “coalition of the billing” appeared at a Maryland Public
Service Commission hearing Jan. 14 to praise Pepco Holdings, which
provides power to D.C. and suburban Maryland counties surrounding it,
and urge that Exelon, a giant Chicago-based utility dependent on aging
and expensive nuclear plants, be permitted to take over Pepco. Only a
few lone voices objected on behalf of ratepayers and the environment.

Merger approval would make Exelon the largest utility not only in
Maryland but in the US, as [*a coalition of 20 progressive and
environmental groups in Maryland argued in late
2014*](http://chesapeakeclimate.org/press-releases/20-maryland-groups-oppose-the-exelon-pepco-merger/)
when presenting a united objection to the merger.  “The proposed merger
would harm consumers and the environment and prevent Maryland from
realizing a clean, affordable, and reliable 21st-century electric grid,”
the coalition contended.

Instead, “this merger would lock over 80% of Marylanders into a
20^th^-century grid controlled by a single company based in Chicago” and
one with a track record of actively opposing renewable energy policy,
the coalition’s statement continued.

Little concern about environmental effects or the vulnerability of
ratepayers under the new regime was heard from the parade of
well-dressed charitable organization representatives who testified
before the PSC at the hearing at Prince George’s Community College.

Instead, the merger supporters from United Way, the Prince George’s
Business Roundtable, the Arbor Day Foundation, one I.B.E.W. local and
the Anacostia Watershed Society lauded the companies for their past
contributions and purported commitment to minority hiring and
subcontracting – expressing hope that crumbs would continue to fall from
the corporate table.

Generally progressive organizations like the Prince George’s NAACP fell
into line, president Bob Ross expressing support for the merger and
gratitude for Pepco’s past financial contributions with no reference to
the potential exposure of ratepayers. David Harrington, once a fairly
progressive member of the Maryland Senate, endorsed the merger speaking
as executive director of the county Chamber of Commerce, and citing
Exelon’s “unwavering track record of environmental stewardship.”

Some local residents, less well-turned-out citizens appeared in small
numbers to oppose the merger on the grounds that Exelon’s recent record
as corporate overlord of Baltimore Gas & Electric and its dependence on
nuclear for over half its overall generating capacity threatened both
ratepayers and the environment.

The most comprehensive opposition came from a self-identified resident
and ratepayer from Upper Marlboro whose “household has been a
residential solar generator for over three years.” As did the earlier
anti-merger coalition, he argued that distributed generation involving
renewable sources would improve Maryland’s overall power picture. “This
case is about the shape of our grid and who gets to make money off of
it. Exelon has all the wrong incentives here,” he said. The giant
corporation, facing increasing expense from its aging nuclear power
plants, “is looking for a cash cow… to shift its financial risk onto
ratepayers.” He also cited the company’s record of opposing renewable
energy. Pepco, by comparison, will represent “ratepayers, not just
shareholders,” in the three-state regional power grid, he said.

But the well-manicured turnout from the nonprofit and charitable
community was numerically overwhelming. Maryland, as one of 15 states
with deregulated utilities, has comparatively little public authority
over the corporate providers of power in the state. Maryland and DC are
in the 5-state “PJM” regional grid, where Exelon has huge sway already.
The [*Department of Energy’s statistics
show*](http://www.publicpower.org/files/PDFs/RKW_Final_-_2013_update.pdf)
that states (mostly Atlantic Coast states) with deregulated (corporate)
power providers rather than public power authorities have higher
electrical rates. [*One quite red state has a statewide public power
utility –
Nebraska.*](http://community-wealth.org/content/nebraska-s-community-owned-electricity-system)
A national environmentalist perspective on this Exelon proposal is at
[*http://grist.org/climate-energy/the-exelon-pepco-merger-big-nuke-heavy-utility-looking-for-new-ratepayers-to-fleece/*](http://grist.org/climate-energy/the-exelon-pepco-merger-big-nuke-heavy-utility-looking-for-new-ratepayers-to-fleece/)

The PSC decision likely remains some time away, but the Maryland public
hearings on the case have concluded. Comments from the public in
addition to those made at the series of public hearings may be made by
writing David J. Collins, Executive Secretary, Maryland Public Service
Commission, 6 Saint Paul Street, Baltimore, MD 21202-6806. No comments
are accepted at the PSC website. “Evidentiary hearings” on the merger,
which is case no. 9361, are scheduled before the full PSC during the
last week of January and [*every day from Monday, Feb. 2 to Friday, Feb.
6.*](http://webapp.psc.state.md.us/Intranet/maillog/hearing_new.cfm)

[*Chronicling the wreckage of bipartisan
neoliberalism*](http://dsadc.org/chronicling-the-wreckage-of-bipartisan-neoliberalism/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2015**

**Review**: *Losing Our Way: An Intimate Portrait of a Troubled America*
 by Bob Herbert (Random House, 2014)

*By David Duhalde*

The Great Recession’s poverty is just as hidden from public view among
the formerly rich as it is among the poor and working classes. Bob
Herbert, the retired *New York Times* columnist, chronicles the façade
of economic security in his latest book, *Losing our Way*.

Wealthy Hunterdon County in western New Jersey, known primarily for its
horse farms and scenic rolling hillsides, had experienced a dramatic
increase in families seeking federal food assistance during the
recession and its aftermath. The director of a social service agency
that found itself offering assistance to an entirely new constituency
told *Bloomberg News* “Sometimes people will come in a Mercedes.
Sometimes they come in \[wearing\] Ralph Lauren. But you never know.
That may be all they have.” (page 41)

These stories make Herbert’s work as upsetting as it is uplifting. The
self-proclaimed “intimate portrait of a troubled America” places
summaries of academic work side-by-side with personal stories, including
by my fiancé, about the four themes. The “way” was our willingness to
spend heavily on public works, public education, and other social goods
even if it means higher taxes and a long-term return on
investment. Herbert walks the reader through 12 chapters about the
themes of employment, war, education, and infrastructure.

He juxtaposes the seemingly separate, but interconnected, policies that
our elected leaders enacted with deadly consequences. Herbert recalls
the Bush administration’s unprecedented call for simultaneous tax
cuts *and *war. Foreign conflict was paid for with our money that was
needed at home. The president and politicians of both parties sent our
young people to fight Iraqis and Afghanis, but were unwilling to battle
our crumbling infrastructure.

Through profiles of wounded soldiers and workers, Herbert chronicles
death, injury, and recovery on the international and domestic front.
Soldiers continue to be killed and maimed long after many high-level
government officials had concluded the wars had limited benefit.
Congress and the president funnel billions into these conflicts while
ignoring our outdated public works. Instead of terrorism, US residents
are killed by broken levees or collapsing bridges, and are poisoned by
compromised water systems.

Herbert also unmasks the corporate agenda behind much of “education
reform.” He separates the proponents of education reform: the
well-intentioned Bill Gates, the malicious Michelle Rhee, and the
money-hungry Rupert Murdoch. Gates’ oversized wallet propelled his
social experiment of small schools within one building into existence.
The scheme, which was abandoned with little fanfare, is unable to build
community or significantly increase graduation rates, while successfully
pushing the most troubled students into other, failing, schools.

Rhee’s toxic mix of self-righteousness and an affinity for termination
(she gleefully invites a news crew to watch her fire an educator) led to
the downfalls of both her and the DC mayor she served. Murdoch and
scores of other charter advocates cannot hide their interests in the
profits from the privatization of public education. They work night and
day to undermine the social support of school as a public good.

The chapters on the troubled job market cover both the young and old,
and were deeply personal, especially to me. Herbert interviewed one of
my own loved ones. He tells her story of frustration at the inability to
break into a profession that she not only went to school for, but was
promised would have jobs in abundance. Instead, she found herself both
living in cramped space at home and experiencing glass ceilings at work.
For her, many others, and myself things have slowly improved as the
economic recovery moves along. But many young adults remember when the
question was what job you would have after college, not if you’d be
working.

Herbert knows hiding poverty and economic insecurity are not new, and
neither are the solutions to ending them. He cites Michael Harrington’s
1962 classic, *The Other America,* which shocked many comfortable people
at the time with the fact that poverty was not disappearing for millions
of their fellow citizens. Thirty years after the first publication,
Irving Howe asked: How can you allow such a scandal to fester in this
country? Herbert writes “that question is no less relevant and the
scandalous extent of poverty in America no less shameful.” To combat
inequality and injustice, Herbert advocates a heavily used tool of the
1960’s: disruptive politics.

Bob Herbert’s book is an unequivocal reminder that well-organized and
disruptive protest is a proven method of social change. Our country’s
ideological extremes motivate much of the support for disruptive
politics in the Obama era, such as the Tea Party, Occupy Wall Street,
and today’s Black Lives Matter movement. It is a refreshing call for
collective action in a time when many liberals would rather embrace
another messianic presidential run (substituting Elizabeth Warren for
Barack Obama – because the first time worked so well) than question
their own dismal track record.

In the epilogue, Herbert calls for new leadership — not of a president
or a new party, but from grassroots leaders. As for how those people can
make lasting change, Herbert opines:

The short answer is direct action. The legendary organizer Saul Alinsky
taught that there were two main sources of power: money and people. As
virtually all of the money is currently on the side of the entrenched
power, the only viable option for ordinary Americans is the creative use
of their own energy, intelligence, and superior numbers. Democracy might
have taken a beating in the United States, but it is not dead. A
tremendous amount of power still resides with the people. And history
has shown again and again that direct action, when properly organized
and sustained, can be remarkably effective. The abolitionists, civil
rights activists, labor organizers, and feminists all understood that
democracy was not meant to be a sporting event, a pastime for interested
onlookers. Taking responsibility for one’s individual
circumstance *and* the well-being of the country has always required
much more than merely casting a ballot…Without that kind of increased
citizen involvement no real change for the better can be expected.

After three decades of bipartisan neoliberalism, it is hard to disagree.

*David Duhalde was the YDS national organizer from 2006 to 2008 and
currently researches for a campaign finance reform group in Washington,
D.C. He is a member of DSA’s National Political Committee.*

[*Coalition Forms to Address Gentrification Crisis in
DC*](http://dsadc.org/coalition-forms-to-address-gentrification-crisis-in-dc/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2015**

** ***By Andy Feeney*

Ever-rising rents and real estate values, growing inequality, the
actions of private developers, lax laws and regulations, and a sometimes
corrupt collaboration between politicians and developers have combined
to create a crisis of gentrification in the District of Columbia over
the years.  In a January panel discussion before a packed audience at
the Busboys and Poets at 14^th^ and V Street N.W. in the District,
several local anti-gentrification activists discussed a new campaign to
bring the crisis under control.

The campaign, the People’s Platform, is being led by ONE DC, an
organization of roughly 400 members based in the rapidly gentrifying
Shaw neighborhood. ONE DC describes itself as dedicated to many of the
principles that inspired the late Ella Baker and the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee in the 1960s, including participatory democracy; 
involving grassroots people in the decisions that affect their lives;
minimizing hierarchy and professionalism in organizations working for
social change; and engaging in direct action to resolve social problems.

Its mission, according to ONE DC literature, “is to exercise political
strength to create and preserve racial and economic equity in Shaw and
the District,” and in doing so to “create a community in DC that is
equitable for all.”  Its organizing campaigns center on popular
education, community organizing, and alternative economic development
projects, and the People’s Platform campaign against gentrification
incorporates several of these ideas.

Joining with ONE DC in the People’s Platform campaign are D.C. Jobs with
Justice (DC-JwJ), the local Restaurant Opportunities Center (ROC DC);
Our DC, an organization working for better jobs and wages for low-income
District residents; and Empower DC, an organizing group working to
“enhance, improve and promote the self-advocacy of low and moderate
income DC residents in order to bring about sustained improvements in
their quality of life.”

The objectives and demands of the People’s Platform campaign are many
and varied.  One is to raise the minimum wage in the District to \$15 an
hour, a goal that will be the focus of Metro DC DSA’s main organizing
campaign this year.  However, other campaign goals are focused almost
entirely on fighting gentrification, among other means by making a
number of changes in D.C. law and regulations affecting rent subsidies,
the availability of public housing, and financial assistance for tenants
who wish to take advantage of the District’s existing TOPA law allowing
residents to purchase units in their own buildings when building
ownership changes.

Another key focus of the People’s Platform is ending the District’s
current practice of auctioning off abandoned vacant lands and empty
buildings to private developers for redevelopment, which generally
occurs in a fashion that eliminates housing stock for low-income
residents, often people of color, with children and developing new units
aimed at occupancy by higher-income, younger professional people, often
white, who can afford significantly higher rents while requiring fewer
services. In the place of such practices, the People’s Platform calls
for several measures to keep abandoned lands and buildings in public
ownership and make them available for cooperative housing developments
to be owned by low-income residents themselves.

According to Bob Schlehuber, an individual member of the People’s
Platform coalition who emceed the panel discussion at Busboys and Poets,
another focus of the campaign is on eliminating or reforming the often
corrupt financial arrangements that currently enmesh DC politicians with
real estate developers hoping to profit from gentrification.

For more information about ONE DC, please click here: 
[*http://www.onedconline.org/*](http://www.onedconline.org/). For more
information about the People’s Platform campaign, click here:
[*http://www.onedconline.org/peoplesplatform*](http://www.onedconline.org/peoplesplatform).

[*Cozy Bipartisanship So Far with New GOP Gov. in
Md.*](http://dsadc.org/cozy-bipartisanship-so-far-with-new-gop-gov-in-md/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2015**

*By Woody Woodruff*

In the National Lampoon’s brilliant 1978 parody of a Sunday newspaper,
the *Dacron (Ohio) Republican-Democrat*, the radical premise about the
illusion of US two-party politics is exemplified in the paper’s
nameplate. Close readers of that classic come to realize that, while
members of the two parties ostensibly represent the local power
structure, all important planning boards, letting local contracts,
ownership of property and the means of production inhere in an unelected
power. In the 1978 classic newspaper parody, the local power structure
was an organized crime family, but hey, that was the era of *The
Godfather*. Socialists understand that capitalism, which is organized
crime, was the ruling power in Dacron, Ohio, “Motor Home Capital of the
World,” behind the façade of two-party government.

Its parallels emerge every time the Maryland General Assembly, with its
overwhelming Democratic majority, makes nice with the new Republican
governor even as Gov. Larry Hogan rolls back whatever limited progress
was made during the O’Malley administration. An avuncular front man,
Hogan has reinstated much of the Republican agency infrastructure – and
people –  that made the previous (Bob Ehrlich) Republican administration
such a disaster.

**The Hogan budget** reflects a bipartisan unwillingness to raise
revenues consonant with a wealthy state… instead a “structural deficit”
is used as an excuse to cut vital services to keep the rapacious
business community quiet. They get more every time they ask.
[*http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-budget-briefing-20150126-story.html\#page=1*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-budget-briefing-20150126-story.html#page=1)

**A much-challenged law** requiring major counties to reduce the
pollutants they send to the Chesapeake Bay has survived so far, despite
being ridiculed as a “rain tax” by Republicans. Under the Hogan regime,
the counties that elected him are feeling free about [*rolling back
their stormwater management
fees.*](http://eedition2.baltimoresun.com/Olive/ODE/BaltimoreSun2/)
Individual homeowners were paying pretty low fees under the requirement,
but the fees were hitting hard on developers with large tracts and big,
heavily polluting parking lots (and quite a few mega-churches,
especially in Prince George’s County, where huge tracts of church land
are otherwise tax-exempt). The Sun article doesn’t background the
situation sufficiently – if the federal EPA does not find the Bay
pollution mitigated, the state and its jurisdictions face big fines. The
same applies to Hogan’s casual rollback of an O’Malley plan to regulate
chicken manure disposal on the Eastern Shore, where it is another major
polluter. The big industrial chicken farmers knew that their boo-hoos
would register on a Republican administration, and now they’ve got one.
[*There’s a
push-back*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/blog/bal-legislation-coming-on-farm-pollution-20150128-story.html),
though, from House leadership.

**Some further progressive goals** hoped-for in this session look like a
much heavier lift when facing the GOP regime. Lawmakers will attempt to
double the 2025 goals for renewable energy use in the state to 40
percent, based on the state’s being ahead of the previous target so far.
But it looks as though the proponents will plow ahead; the Renewable
Portfolio Standards bill has a Senate sponsor and environmental forces
are working on the House members. In other good news, earned sick leave
for all workers is returning to the agenda for the third year this
session:
[*http://www.baltimoresun.com/business/bs-bz-gbc-sick-leave-20150126-story.html*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/business/bs-bz-gbc-sick-leave-20150126-story.html).
And Sen. Paul Pinsky will file a [*bill to make Maryland the fifth state
to call for a constitutional
convention*](http://www.somdnews.com/article/20150130/NEWS/150139882/1057&template=southernMaryland)
to overturn Citizens United….

[*DC Utility Watchdogs, Ratepayers, Climate Activists Unite in Opposing
Proposed PEPCO-Exelon
Merger*](http://dsadc.org/dc-utility-watchdogs-ratepayers-climate-activists-unite-in-opposing-proposed-pepco-exelon-merger/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

For many years, politicians and utility customers in the service area of
Pepco, the Potomac Electric Power Co., have complained about Pepco’s
repeated failures to ensure reliable electricity service, especially in
the wake of major wind storms and snowfalls that can topple trees and
take down power lines.  Now, there is a chance that Pepco’s operations
will be absorbed by an enormous, multi-state utility company
headquartered in Chicago, which might be just as bad at ensuring
reliable service as Pepco and probably won’t be as responsive to DC-area
customers and elected officials.

That’s one reason why the Office of People’s Counsel (the government
unit in the District charged with representing the interests of utility
consumers), and several groups and individual voices representing local
ratepayers and green energy advocates are opposing the proposed merger
of Pepco and its holding company Pepco Holdings, Inc, with the Exelon
Corporation and its associated business entities.

What some of the merger opponents are saying, essentially, is that an
Exelon takeover of Pepco would help to reverse the beneficial impacts of
a basically “capitalist” reform in utility operation and regulation that
has gone into effect in PEPCO’s service area and much of the nation over
the past few decades.  The capitalist reform in question was the legal,
regulatory and economic separation of electric energy generation from
electric energy distribution.

Smart business economists have long recognized that the distribution of
electricity to a wide customer base, because of the centralized network
of transmission wires needed, is a “natural monopoly,” a service that
only a single corporate entity can carry out efficiently over a big
customer base.  The generation of electricity from coal, nuclear power,
oil, natural gas, wind power or solar cells, however, is a potentially
competitive business.  To provide individual customers with lower
prices, and also to allow cleaner and greener energy sources like solar
energy and wind power to compete in the electricity market with big
coal-fired and nuclear-based generating plants, it makes a kind of
economic sense to allow electric power providers to compete for
business, but to continue having the juice delivered to ratepayers
through a regulated monopoly distribution company.

Many years ago, the District and the state of Maryland therefore largely
deregulated electricity generation across Pepco’s present service area,
while keeping Pepco itself as a distribution company to get power to its
traditional customers.  But the proposed merger of PEPCO with Exelon,
the critics are saying, would potentially negate the “deregulation” that
has occurred.

Why?  As Alex Doukas of the climate activist group DC Divest testified
in December before the D.C. Public Service Commission, Exelon as a
company is a “generating giant,” and “fundamentally a generator of
electricity” – not, like present-day Pepco, a company focused on
distribution.  In fact, Exelon owns some 35,000 megawatts of power
generating capacity scattered across a number of states, and some of its
power plants produce electricity at “above market rates,” meaning it has
an incentive – if it can do so – to force its customers to buy power
from it at higher prices than they could receive from other electricity
providers.

If Exelon, the “generating giant,” gains control over Pepco as a
regulated monopoly provider of electricity distribution, the merged
entity will have an enhanced opportunity to force D.C. consumers to eat
its higher generating costs, Doukas and other critics of the merger
argue.

“In many ways, the interests of a \[generating\] company like Exelon  …
and the interests of electricity consumers are inherently in conflict,”
Doukas further testified in December.  “Consumer savings, including
through energy efficiency, represent a cost to generators.  History has
shown that there is a grave risk to progress on energy efficiency if
it’s left to companies who, like Exelon, have dominant interests in
electricity generation.”

In oral testimony also submitted to the District’s Public Service
Commission (PSC) in December, local environmental advocate and
researcher Marchant Wentworth pointed out that nuclear energy has
recently provided some 57 percent of Exelon’s power generating capacity,
according to the company’s own 2013 10-K filing.

“Nuclear power plants are vulnerable to increased costs” due to several
different factors, Wentworth added.  In the wake of the recent Fukishima
nuclear reactor disaster in Japan, they face additional costs related to
safety improvements needed to address the risks of such disasters. They
also face added costs related to the storage of nuclear waste as well as
additional costs “due to needed upgrades in \[their\] use of cooling
water” under EPA Rule 316(B).  Still another cost that older nuclear
reactors face – and many of Exelon’s reactors are aging – consist of the
projected costs of “decommissioning” old reactors at the ends of their
useful lives and disposing safely of some of their components that are
radioactive.

Financial losses to Exelon “derived from sources that would not be
regulated by this Commission,” Wentworth concluded, “could force Exelon
to attempt to recover money from District ratepayers in order to keep
its stock price up and satisfy its shareholders.”

Citing these and other factors, the D.C. Office of the People’s Counsel
on Nov. 3 called on the PSC to reject the proposed \$6.8 billion merger
proposal.  People’s Counsel Sandra Mattavous-Frye filed testimony with
the PSC acknowledging that Pepco and Exelon have proposed a \$14-million
“Customer Investment Fund” to shield local ratepayers from negative
economic impacts in the short run.  However, the OPC testimony added
that the proposed fund is “small compared to the substantial risks
created by the merger,” and that its benefits would be negated by risks
“associated with the three ‘R’s:  Reliability, Rates and Renewables –
all major areas where this application falls short.”

Warning of the likelihood of “serial rate cases” to raise prices once
the proposed deal is completed, Ms. Mattavous-Frye warned:  “If the
merger is approved, consumers are likely to see higher rate increases
than if the merger were not approved.”  Her prepared testimony
continued: “because Exelon has a riskier financial profit than Pepco,
consumers will pay even higher rate increase than \[they\] would under
Pepco.”

PEPCO’s problems with reliability and recovery from power outages might
have made it unpopular locally, but according to the OPC’s testimony,
“Exelon will deliver a lower level of reliability than Pepco would
provide,” partly because its merger proposal is “devoid of any best
practices to address vegetation management and feeder maintenance – two
areas critical for improving reliability.”

The OPC also has expressed concern about the economies of scale normally
associated with corporate mergers leading to the loss of DC-area jobs
now provided by Pepco, and has warned that the merger will “likely have
a detrimental impact on … wholesale electricity markets” once Exelon
supplants Pepco Holdings, Inc. (PHI) in the stakeholder negations of the
regional PJM pool of linked electricity providers.    PHI has
“traditionally” advocated for customer interests in the PJM stakeholder
process, but “Exelon’s generation-driven priorities … would conflict
with and may nullify PHI’s historic emphasis on cost implications and
reliability for consumers.”

For climate activists and renewable energy activists commenting on the
merger proposal, a major factor is Exelon’s record to opposing federal
tax subsidies for wind energy generation, on the one hand, and its
opposition to “distributed” electricity generation, on the other.

Back in the late 1980s, the Carter administration pushed through federal
regulatory reforms that encouraged states to allow individuals and small
businesses that generate their own power from small solar energy, wind
power and other renewable sources to sell back some of the electricity
they produce to the utility distribution grid.  The policy of “reverse
metering” or “net metering,” so called, essentially enables a small
producer of solar-generated electricity to generate more than enough
power for its own needs during a sunny day, for example, and to sell
that extra power back to the local electricity distribution utility. 
Then during the night, when solar cells obviously are not providing any
electricity, the owner of the solar cells can buy electricity from the
grid, just like anyone else.

Such reverse metering, by allowing multiple owners of small renewable
energy producing units to contribute to the grid collectively, has the
potential to make solar and wind energy production more affordable and
to reduce the long-term need for more coal and nuclear plants.  Pepco as
a distribution-only utility currently supports such “distributed energy”
production.

However, merger critics say, Exelon as a large power generator has every
economic reason to oppose distributed power generation, and in recent
years it has done so in several states, in some cases working in
alliance with ALEC – the rightwing American Legislative Exchange Council
– to argue against small solar and wind power producers being able to
sell to the grid.   The company also has lobbied in Congress against
federal tax credits for wind energy production.

Although Exelon in the past “has supported clean air laws and … energy
efficiency,” the OPC said in its testimony, “these notable efforts are
substantially outweighed” by the corporation’s “vocal” opposition to
wind power and distributed generation.

Accordingly, a number of individuals and groups supporting small-scale
renewable energy production are opposing the merger.

Despite the reasoning of merger foes, however, the Dec. 17 PSC hearing
on the proposal, which I attended as an individual, featured striking
turnout of individuals representing local utility contractors and a host
of DC-area charitable organizations all firmly supporting Exelon’s bid
to take over Pepco.

In statement after statement, individuals testified that Pepco has
historically been very generous in contributing to local black-owned
businesses and social service organizations, and they were virtually
unanimous in predicting that Exelon would be even better than Pepco has
been.  The merger will produce greater service reliability, an increase
in local utility-related jobs, and economies of scale that generate
lower electricity prices for consumers, many of them insisted.

Dave Freeman, a former chairman of the board of the giant Tennessee
Valley Authority (TVA) and a former operating manager of several other
large, publicly owned utilities, including the New York Power Authority
and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP), began his
testimony to the PSC by saying that at TVA he, too, had ensured that his
public utility contributed generously to local businesses and charitable
groups.

Contributing to local charities was a well-known way of buying local
political support with utility money, Freeman suggested.  He went on to
praise the Pepco and Exelon public affairs departments for likely
preparing the testimony of many individuals supporting the merger at the
hearing.

The District PSC’s hearings to solicit public testimony on the merger
have now concluded, but interested individuals can still submit written
testimony on the proposal until March 26, 2015.  Written statements may
be submitted by mail or in person to Brinda Westbrook-Sedgwick,
Commission Secretary, Public Service Commission of the District of
Columbia, 1333 H Street, N.W., Suite 200, West Tower, Washington DC
2005, or they can be emailed to
[*PSC-CommissionSecretary@dc.gov*](mailto:PSC-CommissionSecretary@dc.gov),
or submitted through the Commission’s eDocket system at
[*http://www.depsc.org/edocket.asp*](http://www.depsc.org/edocket.asp).

For DSAers interested in hearing more from former TVA chairman Dave
Freeman, he is scheduled to speak on the history and future of public
power in the United States at our next general membership meeting.  It
will occur Sunday, Feb. 15 at 2 p.m. at the Watha P. Daniel/Shaw Library
in the District.

[*Fight to Block Pacific Trade Deal
Accelerates*](http://dsadc.org/fight-to-block-pacific-trade-deal-accelerates/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

Labor, environmentalist and other organizers are stepping up their
campaign to block Congress’s giving President Obama “fast track”
authority to negotiate the proposed Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP).  On
Jan. 7, hundreds of anti-TPP activists participated in a national
conference call featuring Naomi Klein, author of *The Shock Doctrine*
and *This Changes Everything*, on the subject of how existing trade
treaties such as NAFTA undercut the ability of elected governments at
the state, provincial and national levels to promote green energy
policies and combat climate change.

The establishment of the TPP would make matters worse, Klein said: the
proposed treaty is essentially a “corporate insurance policy against
democracy” that would enable affected corporations to challenge if not
overturn citizen efforts to restrain carbon emissions, provide
incentives for local renewable energy production and block the
construction of pipelines and ports to facilitate exports of fossil
fuels.  In reaction to the climate change threat, Klein said, a global
entity she calls “Blockadia” has come into existence that seeks to stop
fossil fuel exports on the ground, and “as Blockadia spreads, there are
going to be more and more desperate efforts by the fossil fuel companies
to use trade policies to win battles  in trade tribunals that they have
lost in public opinion.”

Participating in the conference call with Klein were regional organizers
for MoveOn.org, Alyssa Simons of Public Citizens Global Trade Watch,
Andrea Miller of People Demanding Action (PDA), and AFL-CIO trade
specialist Celeste Drake, along with Ilana Solomon, head of the
Responsible Trade Program for the Sierra Club.

Speaking for the Sierra Club, Solomon labeled the climate change
challenge “the major environmental crisis of our times” and stated that
combating it “is going to mean making several major changes to our
economy” that would be far more difficult to achieve under the TPP as
well as a companion proposal, the Trans Atlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership (TTIP).  Solomon added: “The TPP would actually grant new
powers to the coal, oil and natural gas industries,” including by
mandating that the U.S. Department of Energy automatically approve
exports of natural gas.  The proposed pact also would “fundamentally
prohibit national governments from incentivizing local energy
production.”

The corporations, the Obama administration and pro-corporate Republicans
and Democrats are stepping  up their efforts to get “fast track”
authority for Obama to negotiate the treaty passed by Congress within
the very near future, PDA’s Andrea Miller told conference call
participants.  To fight against that, PDA and other organizations have
organized recurring “twitter storms” to bombard the Twitter accounts of
House members with anti-TPP messages.  PDA’s web site also has devised
form letters that anti-TPP activists can send to local newspapers to
oppose the proposed treaty, and possible variations of these letters
include language suitable “for contacting newspapers in your area  if
they are a little right-wing.”

Organizers of the anti-TPP coalition, who have been holding periodic
conference calls on this issue for almost two years now, also are
thinking about scheduling actions in the home offices of individual
members of Congress during the President’s Day recess in February,
participants in the conference call said.

Celeste Drake of the AFL-CIO said people looking for fact sheets to use
in making anti-TPP arguments to members of Congress may be able to find
fact sheets on TPP, TTIP and the “fast track” issue through the AFL-CIO
at the web site
[*AFLCIO.org/issues/trade*](http://www.aflcio.org/Issues/Trade). 
Individuals who are interested in participating in the anti-TPP Twitter
storms should look to the PDA web site at
[*www.peopledemandingaction.org*](http://www.peopledemandingaction.org/).

[*GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS FEBRUARY
2015*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-february-2015/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt; February 2015***

**Human Activities Are Pushing the Earth Past 4 Dangerous Limits: Report
— **

Ongoing economic expansion, inappropriate technologies and human
population growth together are pushing past four environmental
boundaries that are critical to the stability of the “Earth System,”
according to a new study published in *Science.*  Together, warns one of
the report’s coauthors, the impacts of these changes could destabilize
the global ecosystem over a time span ranging from a few decades to the
coming century.  Unless current conditions change, Earth in the future
“is likely to be much less hospitable to the development of human
societies.”

The study, by a team that in 2009 explored some similar boundaries,
identifies global deforestation rates, the rate of species extinctions,
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, and the release of nitrogen and
phosphorous nutrients into the oceans as the four critical areas in
which human activity, and especially economic growth, is pushing into
the danger zone. The study was reported by Joel Achenbach in the Jan. 16
*Washington Post,*

Achenbach’s article includes several researchers not connected with the
study differing slightly on the immediacy or irreversibility of these
effects. But neither suggests they are anything but bad news.

A separate account of this study that was first published in *Common
Dreams,* and recently republished in the *Moyers Journal* online, is
headlined, “That Was Easy:  In Just 60 Years, Neoliberal Capitalism Has
Nearly Broken Planet Earth.”

For the Common Dreams article, click here: 
[**http://commondreams.org/news/2015/01/16/was-easy-just-60-years-neoliberal-capitalism-has-nearly-broken-planet-earth**](http://commondreams.org/news/2015/01/16/was-easy-just-60-years-neoliberal-capitalism-has-nearly-broken-planet-earth). 
For Achenbach’s story*,* click here: 
[*http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/scientists-human-activity-has-pushed-earth-beyond-four-of-nine-planetary-boundaries/2015/01/15/f52b61b6-9b5e-11e4-a7ee-526210d665b4\_story.html*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/scientists-human-activity-has-pushed-earth-beyond-four-of-nine-planetary-boundaries/2015/01/15/f52b61b6-9b5e-11e4-a7ee-526210d665b4_story.html).   
At *WS* press time it seems difficult to access the abstract of this
article in the Jan. 16 issue of *Science,* but interested readers can
find a number of interpretations of it online.

-   ***Andy Feeney***

Syriza Victory Challenges Austerity Politics

In the wake of Syriza’s victory in last month’s Greek national
elections, the national office of Democratic Socialists of America
issued a [*statement*](http://www.dsausa.org/syriza) celebrating the
vote as a rejection of the European Union’s austerity politics that have
driven Greece to economic desperation.

Also, the current issue of Jacobin Magazine includes an [*extensive
interview*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/01/phase-one/) with Stathis
Kouvelakis, a member of Syriza’s central committee, on how Syriza pulled
off the victory and the its prospects for challenging the global and
European corporate political and economic establishment.

-   ***Bill Mosley***

Matt Yglesias in *Vox* links the (future) Hillary Clinton campaign to
the economic program outlined in a report from the Center for American
Progress. It has Larry Summers’ explicit fingerprints but shows
appealing features for the electorate at large, if not the Democratic
left, Yglesias suggests. Our comrade Ben Davis first posted this on
Facebook.
[*http://www.vox.com/2015/1/16/7557803/inclusive-prosperity-hillarynomics*](http://www.vox.com/2015/1/16/7557803/inclusive-prosperity-hillarynomics)

-   ***WS***

We’ve linked to a lot of stuff about Piketty’s *Capital in the 21^st^
Century* before, but our DSA comrade Bill Barclay, by not showing off,
shows more than almost anybody about the value of this popular book
(including the value of its popularity)…
[*http://www.dsausa.org/capital\_kapital\_and\_the\_continuing\_struggle*](http://www.dsausa.org/capital_kapital_and_the_continuing_struggle)

-   ***WS***

Fine piece of analysis on the downside of cheap gasoline by Ben
Ptashnik, who is also board president of People Demanding Action, the
streetheat offshoot of Progressive Democrats of America.

[*http://truth-out.org/news/item/28406-russia-blamed-us-taxpayers-on-the-hook-as-fracking-boom-collapses*](http://truth-out.org/news/item/28406-russia-blamed-us-taxpayers-on-the-hook-as-fracking-boom-collapses)

-   ***WS***

Sam Gindin’s review of Naomi Klein’s *This Changes Everything:
Capitalism vs. the Planet* in Jacobin.
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/12/naomi-klein-capitalism/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/12/naomi-klein-capitalism/)

-   ***WS***

Tom Edsall, from his occasional corner at the NYT, analyzes the perils
of finance capitalism and the prevailing market fundamentalism. His
headline says it all:

[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/21/opinion/can-capitalists-save-capitalism.html?ref=opinion*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/21/opinion/can-capitalists-save-capitalism.html?ref=opinion)

-   ***WS***

Another fine piece by Edsall, summarizing research on the convergence of
social and political estrangement. When we think about our message and
its recipients, we should think about these findings…\
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/28/opinion/how-did-politics-get-so-personal.html?ref=opinion*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/28/opinion/how-did-politics-get-so-personal.html?ref=opinion)

-   ***WS***

For the hardcore science fiction fans in our readership (there are at
least two), here’s a great piece from the website of the Solidarity
organization about socialist-oriented or –flavored science fiction. The
author passes along and comments on a quote from Marx’s correspondence:
“ ‘we cannot make the recipes of the future until we are in the kitchen
of the future’ – which is as awesome a gendered Marx quote as I have
ever come across. So we tend to hopefully look at science fiction as one
place one might see glimpses of these future recipes.” Much attention is
paid to the excellent Kim Stanley Robinson. The comment threads are a
bonus…

[*http://www.solidarity-us.org/node/2137*](http://www.solidarity-us.org/node/2137)

-   ***WS***

 

This issue has several articles about the struggle to keep our local
power companies from becoming even more corporate and conglomerative.
Out there in one of the reddest states, a statewide public power
authority delivers low-cost power to Nebraskans. This article from the
blog of the Democracy Collaborative sketches the difference real
democratic control of resources can make…\
[*http://community-wealth.org/content/nebraska-s-community-owned-electricity-system*](http://community-wealth.org/content/nebraska-s-community-owned-electricity-system)

-   ***WS ***

> ***Added Feb. 2 2015 after original posting:*** Sam Pizzigati’s
> invaluable blog *Too Much*, chronicling the evils and excesses of
> inequality,  features a discerning interview with economist Robert
> Frank, plus the “Petulant Plutocrat of the Month” and the amusing
> behavior of billionaires at Davos…
> [****http://toomuchonline.org/tmmonthly.html****](http://toomuchonline.org/tmmonthly.html)

-   ***WS***

**Action Needed to Avert “Extinction Event” In Oceans, Scientists Warn
—** Industrial civilization is on the brink of causing mass extinctions
of animal life in the oceans, according to a new scientific study
published by *Science* magazine on Jan. 16.  A summary of the study by
Carl Zimmer of the *New York Times* quotes on study coauthor, ecologist
Douglas McCauley of UC-Santa Barbara, as saying “We may be sitting on a
precipice of a major extinction event” in the oceans.

Factors driving toward that outcome include overfishing, the alteration
of roughly 20 million square miles of ocean bottom by fishing trawlers
dragging huge nets along the ocean floor, and global climate change
coupled with the dissolving of growing emissions of carbon dioxide into
the water, according to the *Times.* As the article quotes another
coauthor of the study as saying, “If you cranked up the aquarium heater
and dumped some acid in the water, your fish would not be very happy.”

Yet despite the growing dangers of mass extinction, humanity has a good
chance of averting this kind of disaster, Dr. McCauley told the *Times.*
The study recommends several steps to address the problem, including
limiting mining and other industrial uses of the oceans, establishing
protective reserves in which threatened and endangered species can
rebuild their populations and long-term limitations on industrial CO2
emissions and climate change.

For access to the Times article and other articles summarizing the
study, click here:
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/16/science/earth/study-raises-alarm-for-health-of-ocean-life.html?\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/16/science/earth/study-raises-alarm-for-health-of-ocean-life.html?_r=0)
and here:
[*http://motherboard.vice.com/read/the-underwater-industrial-revolution-is-driving-ocean-life-to-extinction*](http://motherboard.vice.com/read/the-underwater-industrial-revolution-is-driving-ocean-life-to-extinction)
and here:
[*https://greenwatchnews.wordpress.com/2015/01/17/ocean-extinctions-may-have-crossed-the-tipping-point/*](https://greenwatchnews.wordpress.com/2015/01/17/ocean-extinctions-may-have-crossed-the-tipping-point/).

For a brief abstract of the original article in *Science*, click here: 
[*http://www.sciencemag.org/content/347/6219/1255641*](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/347/6219/1255641).

[*January Socialist Salon views activist terrain in Md.,
D.C.*](http://dsadc.org/january-socialist-salon-views-activist-terrain-in-md-d-c/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2015**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Opportunities for progressive advances exist for both the District and
the suburban Maryland counties surrounding it, but pitfalls in both
areas are substantial. Activists from Maryland’s suburbs and the
District of Columbia described the prospects and hazards of the local
political landscape at Metro DC DSA’s Jan. 15 Salon.

Lucy Duff and Lisa Stand of Prince George’s County, Wally Malakoff of
Montgomery County, and Eugene Puryear, a recent at-large candidate in
the DC Council election, analyzed their respective locales after the
election of Muriel Bowser as DC Mayor and the upset win of Republican
Larry Hogan in the Maryland gubernatorial race.  Both are expected to
continue the business- and developer-friendly policies common to both
parties, but the control of Maryland’s governor over the budget process
may hamper efforts to get progressive policies and measures rolled into
the next round of legislative action.

Duff works in the Prince George’s Peace and Justice Coalition, a largely
white and aging north-county group centered in Greenbelt. PGP&J also
joins with an offshoot of Montgomery Peace Action called Fund Our
Communities, which agitates for a reduced dependency in Maryland on
military spending and employment and for reductions in the Pentagon
budget in favor of human needs spending. PGP&J also is a key agent in
the “Reel and Meal,” a Greenbelt-based monthly progressive-themed film
shown at the community-supported New Deal Café. The group operates in
informal coalition with numerous other groups, including often with the
Greenbelt Climate Action Network, which is lobbying at the local and
state level on environment and sustainability issues and developing a
local sustainability-resilience network. Opportunities include working
with groups that have paid staff such as Progressive Maryland, and
groups focusing on immediate trends such as Get Money out of Maryland
(GMOM) and Move to Amend, both of which fight the effects of the
Citizens United decision and corporate influence on campaign finance.

Lisa Stand, of Progressive Cheverly, described the group’s lobbying
efforts within the Prince George’s County town of that name as well as
at the county and state levels. Acknowledging that the environment for
progressive action is “weak” and in a “holding pattern” as the new
governor jockeys for influence with the veto-proof Democratic majority
in both houses of the General Assembly, Stand said the strength of her
group is in its consistent lobbying presence over the years in coalition
with other progressive groups such as Fund Our Communities and
environmental activist organizations. Progressive Cheverly makes
political endorsements judiciously, she added, suggesting it was
important to weigh the group’s effectiveness in each race and “balance
what \[influence\] you have against what you need.

For this year, Stand offered her own assessment that P\\progressives’
best issue in Maryland is tax fairness, she argued. A future goal for DC
and Maryland activists is to find policy themes that echo with Northern
Virginia progressives, such as the minimum wage campaigns that have
already had success in Maryland and DC.

Where Duff and Stand focused on Prince George’s County, Wally Malakoff’s
group, Progressive Neighbors, is concentrated in the Takoma Park and
Silver Spring areas of Montgomery County, where it originated in an
electoral campaign – to elect a new state senator, Jamie Raskin.
Progressive Neighbors expanded its scope into a Progressive Working
Group that backed progressive state legislation. The group’s decline
after several vigorous years, Malakoff said, came because most members
of the larger coalition were single-issue organizations – “we haven’t
solved that problem.” “Maryland is a place where you can get some things
done” in a progressive vein, he said, but there’s a ceiling on many
economic issues which “the ruling class is solidly against.” As an
example he cited the 2014 legislative session’s major rollback on estate
taxes, a knuckling under to business and wealthy interests that was
hardly touched on by local media. The need for a stronger presence in
Annapolis has led Progressive Neighbors to undertake fundraising to
support a lobbyist during the session.

Puryear shifted the conversation to the District, where, he said, a
distinct working-class political movement is still lacking and some
younger, essentially progressive residents have lost interest and faith
in the political system. Still, he argued, there is a growing
progressive movement – not just sentiment – among the District’s youth,
and it could be sharpened if activists are “a little more bold in who we
say we are” and “get a deeper hearing on socialist and anticapitalist
issues.”

He cited his own recent at-large Council campaign on the Statehood/Green
ballot line as an example, saying there was “an acknowledged level of
serious intent” in the campaign recognized by the political culture and
even the press, and “no red-baiting” about his membership in a socialist
organization[*. The Party of Socialism and
Liberation.*](http://www.liberationnews.org/home-page/about/) Despite
the victories of Democratic candidates or those backed by Democratic
forces (in the case of the independent at-large race, “more young
activists are seeing politics as relevant” though (or perhaps because)
“young people have lost a sense of agency.” The task is to rebuild a
network among young workers, and progressives need to realize the
fundraising prowess it will take to staff such undertakings, Puryear
said.

Comment from the thirty-plus attendees ranged from suggestions that the
political process had to give way to revolutionary organizing, to
arguments that young people in the District and generally were more
apathetic about politics than Puryear had portrayed. Discussions of how
to make progressive politics and policies more appealing to young people
– a frequent concern of the somewhat graying DSA local – focused on
credibility and identification of progressive organizations. “There has
to be some non-Democratic Party force,” Puryear declared.

Responding to the discussion, Duff stressed long-term
relationship-building and Stand a “development of social space” for
progressive activism – “part of it is cultural,” she added. Malakoff
said progressives had to improve their voter education through personal
contact, noting that unlike the members of the Progressive Working Group
coalition, “DSA is not a single-issue group.” Puryear said one
discouraging lesson from his campaign was that “knowing the most about
the issue” had no effect on the electability of a candidate.
Organization is the key, without “getting too program-based,” he added,
and suggested that the financial flexibility of a 501(c)4 “social
welfare” organization designation (an IRS category) should not be an
advantage enjoyed only by the moneyed right wing.

*\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_*

*Metro DC DSA’s Socialist Salon Is a monthly discussion group on
socialist and progressive issues. It ordinarily meets the third Thursday
of the month at 6:30 in a restaurant. For updated information on future
salons see* [**the local’s Meetup
site**](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/206907002/)*.*

[*New Populist Coalition in the Making Is Focus of Chapter’s Jan. 10
Meeting*](http://dsadc.org/new-populist-coalition-in-the-making-is-focus-of-chapters-jan-10-meeting/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

The launching of a new national coalition aimed at building a renewed
populist movement in the U.S. around the key values of economic, social
and environmental justice was the topic of a presentation delivered by
Andrea Miller, Co-Executive Director of People Demanding Action (PDA),
to the Metro DC DSA general membership meeting on Jan. 10.

Miller, born into a leftwing Chicago family and associated in her teen
years with members of the Black Panther Party in Chicago, is a former
organizer with MoveOn.org, the Dennis Kucinich presidential campaign,
and Progressive Democrats of America (PDA), a progressive political
action committee founded by a former DSA member, the late Tim Carpenter.

“Tim felt comfortable calling himself a Democrat,” Miller told DSAers at
the Jan. 10 meeting, but some members of Progressive Democrats have
decided to spin off People Demanding Action as a separate but allied
organization, partly to reach out to disaffected Americans who do not
necessarily consider themselves either “Democrats” or “progressive,” but
who are demanding action to improve the conditions of their lives.

Another reason for the spinoff was that Progressive Democrats of
America, as a registered political action committee, primarily focuses
on federal issues and electoral politics.  People Demanding Action,
however, cannot endorse candidates, although it can lobby on anything,
and it is primarily focused on national politics.  “We’ll work with you
on local dog-catcher races if that’s what’s important to your
neighborhood,” she said.

Commenting on the name of the new organization, Miller added, “People
Demanding Action has a nice Tea Party ring,” and she said members are
already finding certain areas of common ground with some Republicans.

For example, she said, in PDAmerica’s work to block the proposed Trans
Pacific Partnership (TPP), “our primary ally on the right was Michelle
Bachman,” because of Bachman’s valid concern that the TPP would take
away U.S. national sovereignty over issues affecting global
corporations.

PDAction is active in the coalition effort by labor activists,
environmental groups, local community organizations and other concerned
Americans to block the TPP, Miller indicated.  Other currently important
campaigns include pushing for three additional states to approve of the
Equal Rights Amendment so as to get the ERA passed, to address the
“number one issue for women:  economic inequality.”

PDAction has another campaign to pressure all nonprofit organizations
with headquarters in Washington DC to press Congress for statehood for
the District, Miller said – “Full statehood with two senators and an
elected representative.”  However, the organization plans to put much of
its energy into facilitating and supporting grassroots organizing at the
state and local level: “We’re going to be looking for as many community
partners as we can find.”

PDA literature that Miller distributed with her presentation indicates
that the group’s mission is to “bring together activists, organizers,
faith leaders, social justice leaders and legislators to advance the
core solutions of promoting household stability through economic
justice, climate justice and social justice, while protecting the
integrity of democratic elections and voting rights.”

PDA describes its strategy for accomplishing these aims as working to
build a “state-by-state network of activists” who will work for reform
“through education, legislation, mobilization and non-violent direct
action,” so as to facilitate the building of a “populist movement for
justice.”

To build supporters, Miller said, PDA has recruited a board that
includes Rev. Rodney Sadler, chief organizer of the “Moral Monday”
movement in South Carolina; Ben Ptashnik of the American Sustainable
Business Council, a solar engineer and former Vermont state senator who
recently has been active in fighting mass water shutoffs in Detroit; Dr.
Gabriela Lemus, president and executive director of Progressive
Congress, a 501(c) (3)  organization associated with the Congressional
Progressive Caucus; Joel Segal, former staffer for Rep. John Conyers who
played a key role in writing Conyers’ “jobs for all” bill; Alex Lofton,
of Social Security Works; and as honorary PDA chair, Harriet Fulbright,
the widow of the late Sen. J. William Fulbright, early critic of the
Vietnam War and creator of the Fulbright Scholarships.

In addition to fighting the TPP and DC statehood and working for the
final adoption of the Equal Rights Amendment, Miller said, the
organization also is increasingly involved in trying to fight against
bad court decisions at the state and local level that in recent years
have helped conservatives to silence, and often to jail, local
whistleblowers and progressive politicians working for change.  Still
additional campaigns listed on the PDA web site include working for zero
carbon dioxide emissions in the US, fighting water shutoffs in Detroit,
ending the mass incarceration of black men, and fighting against cuts in
funding for educational and other social programs.

Looking forward to the challenge of the coming year, in which activists
face a Republican-dominated Congress with no apparent tolerance for
progressive priorities, Miller said the left needs to imitate what the
Tea Party did in the wake of the crushing Republican defeat in 2008.
When we don’t have representation in Congress, she said, leftists need
to be “kicking up shit” and raising a furor through the media, a
strategy that mostly worked for the numerically outnumbered Tea Party
and that can work for progressives, too.

For more information on People Demanding Action, please check out the
organization’s web site at
[*http://www.peopledemandingaction.org*](http://www.peopledemandingaction.org).

[*To Stop Police Brutality, Change the
System*](http://dsadc.org/to-stop-police-brutality-change-the-system/)

Sunday, February 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist*  &lt;&gt; February 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

The mainstream media’s coverage of recent incidents of police brutality
would lead readers to think there’s simple solution to the problem. 
Suggestions for quick fixes abound, such as requiring police to wear
video cameras, de-militarizing police forces and adopting more gentle
policing methods.  But even in the progressive media, discussion of the
underlying problem – centuries of exploitation and oppression that have
alienated poor and minority communities from society – isn’t as common
as one might think.

Even the nicest, most transparent policing won’t compensate for the fact
that for millions of Americans, the police are the most visible arm of a
government that seeks to control and confine them, not to help or
protect.  One of the most perceptive articles written in the wake of the
Ferguson, New York and Cleveland incidents was an analysis by [*Sam
Mitrani in
LaborOnline*](http://lawcha.org/wordpress/2014/12/29/stop-kidding-police-created-control-working-class-poor-people/),
the newsletter of the Labor and Working-Class History Association. 
Mitrani points out that police forces in the United States were created
largely to repress dissent and keep minorities in their places, with
general public-safety duties being an afterthought.  What constituted a
crime was often defined as any attempt by the poor and working class to
better their lot (hence the long-time criminalization of unions) and
perceived threats by African Americans and other minorities to the
economic status of well-off whites.  Examples of the latter abound, from
re-enslaving African Americans after the Civil War through the use of
work gangs, to targeting black communities for enforcement during the
“war on drugs,” to stigmatizing Latinos through heavy-handed enforcement
of immigration laws.  All of this has produced an us-versus-them
mentality among those on the short end of the nightstick.  Another
perceptive article along these lines is [*Johann Hari’s piece in the
current *In These
Times**](http://inthesetimes.com/article/17536/the_war_on_billie_holiday)
about how the government brought the full weight of anti-drug
enforcement on black jazz artists such as Billie Holiday while giving
prominent white dopers a pass, over the fear that jazz represented
“evidence of a recurrence of the primitive impulses that lurk in black
people, waiting to emerge.”

This is why many communities, especially lower-income African American
communities, justifiably regard the police as an occupying force. 
Efforts started in the 1960s to hire more minority officers (which, as
we have seen, didn’t go very far in Ferguson and other cities) were
correctly seen by many as putting a more familiar face on a
still-oppressive relationship.

Blaming the police only goes so far, for they didn’t create the poverty,
racism and exploitation that they’re charged with keeping in check. 
Indeed, individual officers are themselves victims of the system, thrown
into communities that don’t want them around.  Rare these days is the
police officer setting out on patrol with the intent of killing anyone,
but the combination of arms and fear (on both sides) can cause routine
enforcement to spiral into violence.  Darren Wilson certainly didn’t
gain anything by killing Michael Brown; Brown lost his life, but Wilson
lost his job and will go through life a marked man.

The only solution to police violence, therefore, is to end the
conditions that cause it.  Minority communities need good jobs, health
care, affordable housing and high-quality education; without these
things they will rightly feel more like occupied territories than part
of America.  This will take much greater political will than simply
asking police officers to smile and giving them cameras.  It will take a
re-thinking of how our society functions, of how to make our country
work for everyone.  It will take, in short, a generous dose of socialist
thinking.
