***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from January 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Washington Socialist for January 2014: New Year, Enduring Vision, New
Avenues of
Practice*](http://dsadc.org/washington-socialist-for-january-2014-new-year-enduring-vision-new-avenues-of-practice/)

Friday, January 3rd, 2014

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to 2014’s first issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
monthly newsletter of the DC Metro local, Democratic Socialists of
America.**

You have probably already set aside a thankful compartment in your heart
for those who have sat down at the keyboard at this time of year and
masterfully avoided writing a year-end meditation on What Lies Ahead and
What It All Means.

You will not have to make more room in that space on our account. This
is, after all, a publication of the Left. And your faithful
correspondent will not pass up the opportunity to bloviate on
2013&gt;2014.

As socialists, we are frequently tugged two ways – the vision way, and
the “what is to be done?” way.

It’s likely to be the same in 2014. Our writers and topics in the
January issue fall on both the visionary and  the practical side. The
hope of nudging history slightly leftward in the DC elections, in the
Maryland legislature, in the international political and trade spheres,
in respect to the runaway intelligence agencies, and so forth pivot on
the prospect of the usual activist trudge. Raymond Mungo, in his [*‘60s
era memoir of the Liberation News
Service*](http://www.amazon.com/Famous-Long-Ago-Liberation-Service/dp/1558499474),
took a cue from the large letters stenciled on curbside pavement marking
the way across the street in New York City and called this kind of work
“PED-Xing.” It can be as pedestrian as it is essential. But it makes it
hard to keep an eye on the vision, sometimes.

All too often, instead, we have to map our vision with the help of
books, and we review some good ones in this issue, as well. The visions
of anti-apartheid activists in South Africa and of progressive battlers
at home, as well as of Marx, the founding visionary, are treated.\
As we struggle to redress growing inequality with measures like an
increase in the minimum wage, it’s important to remind ourselves that:

-   Modernity, increasingly,  allows a broad public understanding of the
    productive work it takes to support a society in comfortable
    surplus;

-   that that work and generous surplus can increasingly be accomplished
    by very short, socially managed shared worktimes and the surplus
    (like the work) shared rationally among private and public goods to
    reduce and even eliminate inequality;

-   that the externalities of corporate capital that are ravaging our
    planet are remediable and likely reversible through the application
    of socially-based economic management;

-   and that these facts (despite the countervailing lies) *are becoming
    more and more apparent to more and more of our fellow humans.*
     That’s the hope of socialism and why we grind it out with
    letter-writing, lobbying, rallying and pamphleteering in our
    PED-Xing mode.

Let the unknowns of 2014 and beyond yield to our practice to the extent
we can execute it, and let our vision remain whole before us as the
day-by-day offers us more opportunities to push that capitalist noodle
leftward around the next blind curve. The work is before us, in 2014 as
in every year.

**FIRST, AN IMPORTANT WORD ABOUT OUR FEBRUARY MEETING:**

**Metro-DC DSA to Consider Endorsements in DC Primary Election**\
*By Bill Mosley*\
At its meeting on **Saturday, Feb. 8**, Metro-DC Democratic Socialists
of America will consider endorsing candidates in the April 1 District of
Columbia primary election.

**The meeting will take place from 1:30-2:30 pm at the Cleveland Park
Library, 3310 Connecticut Ave. NW, near the Cleveland Park Metro
station.**

Primaries are being held by the Democratic, Republican, Statehood Green,
and Libertarian parties.  Offices on the ballot are mayor; council
chairman; at-large councilmember; councilmembers for Wards 1, 3, 5 and
6; delegate to the U.S. House of Representatives; U.S. senator; U.S.
representative; and, for voters in the Democratic primary, members of
the Democratic national and state committees.  (The delegate to the U.S.
House, a salaried position that dates back to the early 1970s, is the
official representative of D.C.’s interests in Congress.  The delegate,
currently Eleanor Holmes Norton, serves on committees and can speak, but
not vote, on the House floor.  The unpaid positions of U.S. senator and
representative were created in the early 1990s to serve as lobbyists for
D.C. statehood.  Sometimes known as “shadow” members, they are not
recognized by Congress and don’t serve on committees or have speaking or
voting rights).

At the meeting, Metro-DC DSA will consider motions for endorsements to
any of these offices.  Any local DSA member in good standing in the
organization – i.e., having paid dues within the past year – is eligible
to propose and vote on endorsements.  According to Metro-DC DSA’s
bylaws, decisions on electoral endorsements require a vote of two-thirds
of the members present.

*(January’s meeting is Saturday, January 11 at the Shaw branch library.
Details on the Meetup page.)*

**ALSO IN THIS ISSUE, **

Bill Mosley in advance of our membership meeting (above) anatomizes the
upcoming **mayoral race in 2014**, complete with flawed candidates (but
aren’t they always, in every election everywhere?) and issues and
agendas somewhat deformed by what is considered “the possible.” [*Read
complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/dc-mayors-race-crowded-field-limited-choices/)

Since the material disclosed by Edward Snowden has hit the news, the
things we thought we knew about the **National Security Agency** and the
danger to individual and collective privacy have ballooned into a
portrait of out-of-control government and the rule of law outrun by
technology. Dan Adkins examines the news so far and the effects on the
political economy of information and national sovereignty globally.
[*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/nsas-political-and-economic-crisis/)

BOOKS – a trio of book reviews, starting with Carolyn Byerly’s overview
of **a recent dual biography of Ruth First and Joe Slovo,**
anti-apartheid activists in South Africa who met and married in the
struggle and came to different ends as apartheid began to give way to a
multiracial South Africa. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/revolutionary-lives-in-the-making-of-new-south-africa/)

Andy Feeney reviews an instant classic from 2011, **Terry Eagleton’s
*Why Marx Was Right*.** A somewhat unlikely ex-Trotskyist defender of
full-blown Marxism, Eagleton makes a qualified case for a revered but
difficult founder of socialism, in a witty and winning style. [*Read
complete article*](http://dsadc.org/827/)

Kurt Stand reviews **Sam Pizzigati’s latest book**, the *Rich Don’t
Always Win: The forgotten triumph over plutocracy that created the
American middle class 1900-1970.* Pizzigati, at the Institute for Policy
Studies and writer of the online newsletter “Too Much” (often featured
in our Good Reads), shows how inequality can be contested and reversed –
and how it has been. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/working-people-can-win-a-review-of-sam-pizzigatis-the-rich-dont-always-win/)

There’s something intrinsically frustrating about **defending the
imperfect and unjust US welfare state** as it has devolved to today’s
thin palliative. Andy Feeney argues that the very PED-Xing kind of
effort required to contest further cuts in food stamps is a valuable
practice for today’s progressives and has strong ties to Gramscian
theory. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/the-joys-of-leafletting-and-dc-dsas-fight-against-further-cuts-in-food-stamps/)

As the **Maryland General Assembly** gears up for its three-month
session beginning in mid-January, legislation on a minimum wage increase
and on earned sick leave for all state workers begin another journey
through the legislative grinder after having failed in the 2013 session.
Vibrant action in the District and two adjacent Maryland counties
raising the minimum wage may give a boost to the effort. But there are
plenty of roadblocks, Woody Woodruff recounts. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/high-hopes-for-md-minimum-wage-increase-soured-by-legislative-infighting/)

**Good Reads and more,** including an activism proposal, wrapped up in a
last-minute package for January. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-and-short-takes-for-january-2014/)

[**DC MAYOR’S RACE: Crowded Field, Limited
Choices**](http://dsadc.org/dc-mayors-race-crowded-field-limited-choices/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

 Now that Mayor Vince Gray has decided he will run for re-election after
all, the field of candidates in the April 1 Democratic mayoral primary
is taking shape, somewhat resembling that of the older Elvis on a
fried-food binge.

The Democratic mayoral primary, whose victor has gone on to win every
D.C. mayoral contest since home rule began, this year features 12
candidates, including four current D.C. councilmembers. The Statehood
Green, Republican and Libertarian mayoral races have one candidate each
– respectively, Faith (the bugle-blowing D.C. statehood advocate and
frequent candidate), James M. Caviness and Bruce Majors.

Prior to Gray’s announcement there was speculation, and in some quarters
hope, that Gray would seek retirement rather than a second term.
Certainly his first term has been a disappointment not only to
progressives but to a large swath of D.C. voters who placed their hope
in him. During his 2010 race he garnered support from much of the D.C.
progressive community, including most of the District’s unions and
Metro-DC DSA. Support for Gray was heavily driven by the contrast he
posed to his opponent, incumbent mayor Adrian Fenty. While Fenty was
hard-charging, opinionated and insular, Gray projected openness and
collegiality. Fenty’s four years in office were dominated by his
takeover of DC schools from the elected school board and his
installation of the abrasive Michelle Rhee as school chancellor. Rhee
ran roughshod not only over the local teacher’s union but school
administrators and parents’ organizations as well. While some admired
Fenty’s take-charge attitude, over time he created more enemies than
allies.

Yet Gray had barely taken office when the bad news began to accumulate.
First came the revelation that his campaign had paid Sulaimon Brown, a
vociferously anti-Fenty fringe candidate, to stay in the race and nip at
Fenty’s heels. After the election, the Gray administration rewarded
Brown with a high-paying government job from which he was soon fired
after news media began questioning the appointment. Then came the more
serious revelation: Local businessman Jeffrey Thompson had allegedly run
a giant, off-the-books “shadow” campaign that pumped some \$650,000 in
unreported cash into Gray’s mayoral bid. Several campaign officials have
pled guilty to criminal offenses, and Gray, who denies any knowledge of
the secret campaign, remains under investigation by the U.S. attorney.

Meanwhile, those who hoped Gray would reverse Fenty’s school takeover,
or at least modify it to give parents a greater voice, were
disappointed: He replaced Rhee with the more people-oriented Kaya
Henderson, who continued Rhee’s policies, only with a smile.

But for many of Gray’s one-time supporters, the final straw was his veto
of a bill would have provided a \$12.50 per hour minimum wage for
employees of big-box stores, \$4.25 above the normal D.C. minimum. There
was no question the bill was aimed at Walmart, and for good reason: The
giant retailer’s affinity for busting unions is matched only by its
eagerness to cut costs, with much of its stock manufactured in Asian
sweatshops by workers earning starvation wages. Since the minimum-wage
bill died, Walmart has opened two stored in the District, with more on
the drawing boards.

If there has been a bright spot for progressives during the Gray
administration, it has been his effort to raise the profile of the D.C.
statehood effort, featuring his arrest in 2011 during a pro-statehood
rally and his defiance of Congress by keeping D.C. government offices
open during last fall’s federal shutdown. Unfortunately, this is far
outweighed by his other mistakes and betrayals.

The Democratic mayoral field began to swell before Gray stepped into the
ring, with many of the contenders hoping he would stay out. Of the four
councilmembers running, both Muriel Bowser and Tommy Wells voted against
the higher wage for big-box workers – a litmus test for progressives if
there ever was one. Bowser’s vote is not a shock, as she entered office
as a Fenty protégé and has little allegiance to labor or other
progressives. Wells’ opposition to the bill was another matter; he has
spent his time in office cultivating a progressive image, although his
focus has largely been on promoting public transit and smart growth.

Perhaps as puzzling as Wells’ opposition to the bill was the yes vote of
Jack Evans, trying a second time for the mayor’s seat. Evans has spent
his two decades on the Council as the best friend of developers and
other wealthy interests. Speculation is that Evans was trying to carve
out space in a Gray-less race to differentiate himself from Wells and
Bowser, and believed his corporate benefactors would forgive his
straying from the fold this one time.

Councilmember Vincent Orange was a late entry into the field and appears
to be making a play for the votes of progressives for whom the other
major candidates are tainted. He was a champion of the retailer
minimum-wage bill and a vocal supporter of raising the D.C. minimum wage
to \$11.50, a measure that was approved by D.C. Council in December. Yet
Orange is a late arrival to progressive politics; his political history
has generally been one of opportunism. However, he appears to recognize
the political vacuum on the left and be moving to fill it.

Among the rest of the Democratic field, Reta Jo Lewis, a former State
Department official, stands out for running an aggressive campaign, but
her literature mostly offers the uncontroversial mix of better jobs,
schools and public safety without real specifics. And then there is Andy
Shallal, owner of the Busboys and Poets restaurant-bookstore chain, who
is running as a forthright progressive.

Shallal’s literature emphasizes attacking poverty and homelessness,
promoting equality and ending racial disparities in law enforcement –
issues on which the other candidates are largely silent. And his
restaurants have hosted numerous events appealing to a left-progressive
crowd. As a political neophyte, Shallal’s challenge will be to convince
likely supporters that he is a serious candidate – one with a strategy
for marshaling enough support to win, or at least to be enough of a
threat to force the leading candidates to address issues they might
otherwise ignore. He also will need to make a compelling case that,
should he win, he could overcome his lack of experience to effectively
control the machinery of government and work with the D.C. Council.

Gray, despite all of his problems, enters the race as frontrunner. It
requires only a plurality of the vote to win the nomination and advance
to the general election. Gray retains a core of supporters, and in a
crowded field he could easily split the anti-incumbent vote and cruise
to victory, unless a candidate emerges from the field as the go-to
challenger.

In the unbroken string of Democratic mayoral victories in the general
election, only rarely has a non-Democrat come close (Republican Carol
Schwartz’s 42 percent against Marion Barry in 1994, four years after
Barry’s conviction for cocaine possession, marked the only time a
non-Democrat reached 30 percent). But a lot could happen between April 1
and the November 4 general election – such as more indictments from the
U.S. attorney, perhaps of Gray himself. In that case, there is a
candidate waiting in the wings to pick up the pieces – councilmember
David Catania, a Republican-turned-independent who is exploring a
possible candidacy. As an independent, he would skip the primary round
and run only in the general election. Catania is no progressive; he was
comfortable with Republican economic policies but, as the Council’s
first openly gay member, ditched the party over its hostility to LGBT
rights. A crippled Gray could be vulnerable against Catania, who is a
strong campaigner with a forceful personality.

The 2014 D.C. election will revolve not only around the standard issues
of economics, schools and public safety, but also along the fault lines
of race, age and the clashing priorities of newer vs. longer-term
residents. Many longer-time residents, who tend to be African American,
are concerned about being crowded out by gentrification and the rapid
influx of new, mostly white residents – many of them members of the
millennial generation who are-well educated, professional and
lifestyle-oriented. In addition, with three councilmembers having been
convicted of crimes over the past two years, and a mayor currently under
criminal investigation, ethics will be on the minds of voters as never
before. This is not the most promising backdrop for progressive
politics, but it’s the hand we’ve been dealt.

[*Good Reads and Short Takes for January
2014*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-and-short-takes-for-january-2014/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2014**

***Illuminating text from some undergroundish – and abovegroundish –
sources…***

 **Corey Robin in Jacobin** fingers one of the agonizing and entrapping
features of capitalism… the complexity that consumes all your time. How
ya gonna have time to seize the state if ya hafta calculate your
deductibles every waking minute…?\
[*https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?tab=cm\#inbox/1430b7403c0b8488*](https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?tab=cm#inbox/1430b7403c0b8488)

**The Blue-Green Alliance** – which you may once have heard called the
Apollo Alliance – is a labor-based coalition framework for the Green
Jobs movement. The monthly newsletter is called The Ally; the latest
issue is at
[*http://www.bluegreenalliance.org/theally/december-2013-the-ally*](http://www.bluegreenalliance.org/theally/december-2013-the-ally)

Bill Mosley recommends **Bill Blum’s Anti-Empire report \#123**: an
extended account of the care and feeding of the US memory hole on such
topics as US complicity in Mandela’s original arrest, in the Indonesian
genocide and other episodes… *http://williamblum.org/aer/read/123*

**Election of an explicit socialist** to the Seattle City Council got
lots of press. Here is *In These Times*’s take. It’s helpful also with
background on Socialist Alternative, which doesn’t have a DC formation
so we don’t have much experience with SA. And there was the near miss in
Minneapolis…

[*http://inthesetimes.com/article/15960/can\_socialists\_win\_elections\_in\_the\_u.s/*](http://inthesetimes.com/article/15960/can_socialists_win_elections_in_the_u.s/)

Jeff Faux on the **wreckage in NAFTA’s wake**, 20 years on. Good prep
for taking on the Trans Pacific Partnership corporate boondoggle,
doubtless going into high PR mode as early as this month…\
[*http://fpif.org/nafta-20-state-north-american-worker/*](http://fpif.org/nafta-20-state-north-american-worker/)

Need a break from text? The Economic Policy Institute’s **“13 Most
Important Charts of 2013”** breaks down the growing inequality,
declining/damaged labor markets, the myth of the “skills gap” and other
factors that are making the stock market’s exuberance a totally false
indicator of national well-being…\
[*http://www.epi.org/publication/top-charts-2013/*](http://www.epi.org/publication/top-charts-2013/)

So: back to text, again courtesy of EPI. A Dec. 19 report by David
Cooper demonstrates with some wonkery that **a national minimum wage
increase to \$10.10 would create “roughly 85,000 net new jobs”** over
the phase-in period (2014 to 2016). That’s actually fewer new jobs than
Cooper and a colleague calculated earlier this year. Why? Because since
the earlier study was done, five states have *actually* raised their
minimum wage, taking their workers out of the calculation. EPI’s latest
study is at
[*http://www.epi.org/publication/raising-federal-minimum-wage-to-1010/\#\_note1*](http://www.epi.org/publication/raising-federal-minimum-wage-to-1010/#_note1)
and a HuffPost summary is at
[*http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/12/19/1010-minimum-wage\_n\_4474183.html*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/12/19/1010-minimum-wage_n_4474183.html)

Not to pop our own balloon, but there are **“good (morning) reads”**
available now every day on the increasingly valuable Bill Moyers site,
[*http://billmoyers.com/*](http://billmoyers.com/) … the whole
enterprise has surprising progressive rigor and the Sunday show has had
guests who track well with our politics, like Richard Wolff, Dean Baker,
Grace Lee Boggs, Barbara Ehrenreich, Peter Dreier and more. The “Morning
Reads” provide more than you’ll ever want to pursue in this life, but
hey…

**“Socialist Takeaways.” – from a Montgomery County activist:**

“Let’s test the theory that 50 united people can make a difference in
public policy!I wish to found a new local Ralph Nader style citizens’
advocacy group in Montgomery County with the purpose of keeping Congress
accountable to the American people, instead of to huge corporations, the
military-industrial complex, and the wealthy as it now does. We would
attempt to influence Congress by petitions, phone calls, and personal
visits. I wish to advocate on a wide spectrum of progressive issues,
including limiting government surveillance, civil liberties, civil
rights, LGBT rights, sex traffickinig, anti-war, more funding for social
services like Medicare, Food Stamps (SNAP) and Social Security, prison
reform, end the death penalty, anti-drug war, homelessness, and humane
treatment of animals in factory farms, and limiting the influence of
undemocratic institutions in public policy. Other issues may be included
later. Please agree on most of these issues before joining. The purpose
of the group is to take action, and not debate the issues endlessly. I
will try to reach close to consensus on the issues, and responsibilities
will be shared.

“Please respond to me at [*cause@gmx.com*](mailto:cause@gmx.com), or
call me at [*301-461-6174*](tel:301-461-6174) after 10 am.”

[*High hopes for Md. minimum wage increase soured by legislative
infighting*](http://dsadc.org/high-hopes-for-md-minimum-wage-increase-soured-by-legislative-infighting/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

A remarkable regional accord came together when Montgomery and Prince
George’s counties in the Maryland burbs passed ambitious increases in
the minimum wage and were echoed two weeks later by the District.

In a rash of activities that included coordinated job actions by
fast-food and retail workers around the nation, this capital regional
compact on higher wages supports a Maryland bill in the legislative
session beginning this month. After failing last year, a minimum wage
bill is given a good chance this year and may have the backing of Gov.
Martin O’Malley as a booster.

The counties, and the District, set a four-year escalation of the wage
floor from the current federal level of \$7.25 an hour – which applies
in Maryland – to \$11.50 an hour by 2017.

A flurry of similar actions around the country means that “this year’s
developments provide a higher floor for wages next year \[2014\] in at
least 21 states, a record number,” [*writes Don Lee in the *LA
Times.**](http://www.latimes.com/business/autos/la-fi-minimum-wage-20131209,0,7295277.story?page=1#axzz2nx3lq19s)

Lee reported Dec. 8 that The Labor Department estimated 3.55 million
workers were at or below the minimum wage last year, out of more than 75
million who are paid on an hourly basis and about 128 million workers
overall.

The two Maryland counties’ action was intended in part to boost the
chances of success for a statewide minimum wage package.

But progressives and unions suspect a devious scheme in the
business-besotted Democratic core of the legislative leadership. Jos
Williams, president of the Metropolitan Washington Council AFL-CIO, has
suggested that power brokers in the legislature are planning to use the
upcoming struggle over a statewide minimum wage to quash the independent
actions of the two counties. Williams [*told the Gazette weekly
newspaper
*](http://www.gazette.net/article/20131213/NEWS/131219459/0/gazette&template=gazette)
of rumors of “a ‘compromise’ to raising the statewide minimum wage
\[that\] would revoke the higher wages passed recently in Montgomery and
Prince George’s counties in exchange for a higher statewide wage.”

The *Baltimore Sun* [*agrees that skulduggery is
afoot,*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/opinion/editorial/bs-ed-wage-20131219,0,6081138.story)
and knows who’s behind it. In an editorial Dec. 19, the *Sun* said
“Meanwhile, the biggest obstacle to right-sizing Maryland’s minimum wage
is a Democrat, specifically
[Senate](http://www.baltimoresun.com/topic/politics/government/u.s.-senate-ORGOV0000134.topic)
President [Thomas V. Mike
Miller](http://www.baltimoresun.com/topic/politics/government/thomas-v.-mike-miller-PEPLT004538.topic).
While advocates are pushing for a minimum wage raised to \$8.20 per hour
next year, \$9.15 an hour in 2015 and \$10.10 in 2016 and tied to
inflation thereafter, Senator Miller said recently he’d like it raised
to \$8.25 an hour and then leave it to individual jurisdictions to
decide if they want it any higher than that.

“He’s right that local governments should be able to raise it higher
(Montgomery and Prince George’s counties have already taken that action)
but wrong to set the standard so low,” *The Sun* concluded.

Gino Renne, first vice president of the AFL-CIO Metropolitan Washington
Council, said the session will flush out those behind the alleged
compromise.

“And rest assured that we will go after them,” he said.

[*RaiseMD*](http://raisemd.org/why/), a task force on the minimum wage
project backed by the state’s unions, says “raising the minimum wage to
\$10 per hour will …directly and indirectly boost pay for over half a
million low-wage workers. … Approximately 350,000 Maryland children have
at least one parent who would benefit from an increase in the minimum
wage.”

At the federal level, the minimum wage of \$7.25 per hour has lost so
much ground to inflation that it would take the “Fair Minimum Wage Act
of 2013, a bill introduced by Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa) and Rep. George
Miller (D-Calif.) that would raise the federal minimum wage in three
incremental increases of \$0.95 from its current level of \$7.25 per
hour to \$10.10 per hour” to catch up, according to [*analysis by the
Economic Policy
Institute*](http://www.epi.org/publication/raising-federal-minimum-wage-to-1010/)
and many other sources.

EPI’s David Cooper noted in the Dec. 19^th^ article that the \$10.10
level would “either directly or indirectly raise the wages of 27.8
million workers, who would receive about \$35 billion in additional
wages over the phase-in period.” Over half those affected workers work
full-time. The resulting GDP boost would bring 85,000 new net jobs.

Fourteen states will see an automatic increase in the minimum wage Jan.
1, 2014, either because of new laws or because existing minimum wages
are linked to the Consumer Price Index, [*according to a summary by the
legal website Mondaq.
*](http://www.mondaq.com/unitedstates/x/282070/employee+rights+labour+relations/Fourteen+States+To+Hike+Minimum+Wage+On+January+1+2014)
Most such automatic raises are on the order of 10 to 20 cents per hour.
They include such unlikely places as Florida and Arizona, where the CPI
will push the minimum to \$7.90 (AZ) and \$7.93 (FL). Tipped wage
minimums will also rise in those two states. Colorado, Ohio, Missouri
and Vermont will raise both minimum wage and tipped wage floors, again
tracking CPI. New York and New Jersey came late to the party, passing
laws raising the minimum wage in 2013 but leaving tipped wages at their
current levels, which in New Jersey is an abysmal \$2.13. California,
Montana and Washington require the full minimum wage for tipped workers;
California’s goes up to \$9 and Washington’s to \$9.32.

**Sick leave bill has influential booster**

In Maryland’s 2013 legislative session a well-supported and thorough
bill that would have provided earned sick leave to 700,000 workers who
otherwise face bad choices
[*failed*](http://dsadc.org/paid-sick-leave-meets-a-legislative-roadblock/).

It ran afoul of several money committees well known as the graveyard of
progressive legislation: the Senate Finance Committee and the House of
Delegates Economic Matters Committee. So for another year, the uncovered
workers – 54 percent of them women – continued to have to choose between
going to work sick and forgoing a day’s pay; staying home to care for a
sick child unpaid or take the child to day care instead, with the high
risk of infecting other children.

The crunch , of course, is worst for the state’s low-wage workers, 80
percent of whom have no paid sick leave. For them, a missed day’s pay
can be the difference between making rent or not, paying routine bills
or letting them slide into ruinous arrears.

The measure will clearly be fought over again this year, and has an
influential booster in Del. Jolene Ivey, a Prince George’s legislator
who leads her county’s big House delegation and is also a candidate for
lieutenant governor as ticketmate of gubernatorial candidate Douglas
Gansler.

Ivey’s announcement in a *Baltimore Sun* op-ed Dec. 9 that she would
again sign onto this year’s Earned Safe and Sick Leave Act and “fight
for its passage in the year ahead” gives the measure some impetus. Last
year’s lead sponsor, Del. Thomas Olzsewski of Baltimore County, said in
late spring that he would submit it again with tweaks to answer the
objections of the business-friendly members of the Economic Matters
Committee.

The bill, as last year, will allow workers to earn an hour of sick leave
for every 30 hours of work, up to seven days, with carryover provisions
from one year to the next.

There’s no apparent number for the bill yet – prefile reports on the
legislative website are not updated – but Prince George’s Del. Jolene
Ivey assured a crowd at a Dec. 7 SCLC panel on the 2014 session that the
minimum wage struggle and the parallel one over earned sick leave would
not cancel each other out. Del. Aisha Braveboy of Prince George’s
expressed the same hopes outside the meeting.

Sen. Paul Pinsky, another Prince George’s legislator with a progressive
record, has been quoted as saying (in effect) “It takes a bad bill a
year to get passed in Annapolis. It takes a good bill two or more.” That
will be put to the test again this year.

*— Woody Woodruff*

[*NSA’s Political and Economic
Crisis*](http://dsadc.org/nsas-political-and-economic-crisis/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2014**

 *By Daniel Adkins*

 Most discussion on the National Security Agency is concerned about its
voracious appetite for electronic records and its conflict with the
4^th^ Amendment^1^ – the part of the [Bill of
Rights](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Bill_of_Rights) that
prohibits unreasonable [searches and
seizures](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Search_and_seizure) and requires
any [warrant](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warrant_%28law%29) to be
judicially sanctioned and supported by [probable
cause](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probable_cause). Although some NSA
searches are covered by warrants, other efforts just scoop up data
streams between data centers. This is to say nothing of scooping up
foreign data streams through the U.S and worldwide.

 NSA does have a legitimate goal of detecting and dealing with
terrorists. Yet it is alleged that NSA cannot read many messages it
collects due to a lack of Arabic and Farsi translators. One wonders what
is NSA’s goal if it is not to be capable of reading the messages? It
does boggle the mind that the U.S. now has a surveillance system for the
whole world that Hitler or Stalin could have only imagined in their
dreams.

 NSA is a highly hierarchal and secret agency. Signals intelligence and
communication intelligence (SIGINT and COMINT) are and have been among
the most closely guarded of secrets. The breaking of the German and
Japanese codes during World War II resulted in important victories at
Midway and fighting the U-Boats, although U.S. industrial production was
decisive in the war. NSA culture treats opponents such as al Qaeda and
Iran as existential enemies like Japan and Germany. Yet the nature of
the current conflicts is much more complicated than World War II or the
Cold War. The West and most of the world (countries that are part of the
global market) are engaged in a social-political conflict with al Qaeda
that in many ways is a cultural reaction to multi-nationalism and
religious extremism. One should remember that on 9-11 the U.S. military
establishment was only able to oppose al Qaeda by launching two unarmed
fighter planes to kamikaze the fourth hijacked plane. An *informed*
public (passengers) brought down that plane! So it would follow that
cooperating with the public and allies rather than just scanning them
would be in order. Also, al Qaeda is a political as much as a military
opponent in that how we respect and relate to Islam may be more
important to combating al Qaeda than killing its terrorists would be.
Yet NSA is trying to win the struggle by itself when almost the whole
world is on its side.

 There are three main trends in the Middle East. The Arab Spring has
started a rising appetite, especially for the young, for a functional
life and economy without graft, favoritism, and corruption. Rising
education levels and expectations support that trend. Second, Islamist
trends like the Muslim Brotherhood and the Turkish government try
successfully (or not) to link religious traditions with governments. In
Egypt this trend failed by not paying attention to the economy and the
future. This Islamist trend does not necessarily pose a security threat
of the sort that that the religious extremism of al Qaeda or the Taliban
does. However, and thirdly, the chaos of the transitions has made an
opening for al Qaeda and other extremists. NSA does have a role in
protecting us from those consequences of chaos but the U.S. has a bad
habit of trying to solve problems just by technical means and ignoring
social, cultural, and political dimensions. The technical methods worked
in World War II and to some extent in the Cold War. Now the world is
more connected and requires a more fully informed and cultural solution.

 Now let us assess the economic and international consequence of this
surveillance and the impact on the strongest U.S. economic sector. One
cost is that there now are economic, political, and ethical reasons not
to useU.S. corporations’ clouds (data centers), hardware, and any
communication lines passing through our territory. Any firm or country
that does not want the U.S. government to know all their secrets has to
think more than twice about using services provided by U.S.
corporations. The world may view our internet [*hardware and software as
compromised*](http://allthingsd.com/20131230/the-nsa-and-silicon-valley/)
in the same way the U.S. government now views Chinese hardware. The U.S.
government forbids its agencies to use Chinese communications equipment
because it may, by design, compromise our security. U.S. corporations
may protest this issue to buyers, but everyone knows that the U.S.
government requires secrecy of its industry agreements. In other words,
NSA has just undercut our tech industry’s international balance of
payments as well as our national and corporate trustworthiness. Major
tech companies are [*now protesting these
actions*](http://reformgovernmentsurveillance.com/).

 Much of the world’s communications goes through the U.S. because our
industry has developed earlier and has had greater financing. This
infrastructure includes satellites, landlines, and undersea cables. NSA
has angered Brazil and if Brazil is serious about avoiding NSA spying it
will expand undersea cables and satellites to send its emails and data
to Africa and thus avoid routing them through the U.S. That would be the
only way for South Americans to secure their data privacy in
communications with Europe, Africa and even Asia. An example of this
logic is the global GPS systems. The U.S. and Russia have their own, and
Europe and China will not be far behind creating their own systems to
ensure their full access so as not to depend on the U.S. NSA’s
unilateral actions and the U.S. government’s inaction will lead other
countries to feel that they are being treated like colonies. This may
have been avoided by public country-to-country agreements, but protests
from Germany and Brazil suggest there are no such agreements. If the
goal is to fight al Qaeda, such agreements should be easy as terrorists
do not have the backing of most of the world’s governments.

 Another consequence of scooping up data streams (without warrants)
between the cloud data centers of Google, Yahoo, Microsoft, Twitter,
Mozilla, Facebook, Apple, and others, is that those companies are now
beginning to encrypt their data streams to protect users from unlawful
snooping. [*Microsoft’s general counsel
stated*](http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/12/05/microsofts-general-counsel-n-s-a-hacks-were-an-earthquake-for-tech/),
“We want to live in a world that is safe and secure, but we also want to
live in a country that is governed by the Constitution.” Protecting
customers’ privacy and our corporations’ reputations via encryption adds
a business cost to the world’s tech industry and NSA.

 The end result of NSA’s surveillance is likely to be an erosion of U.S.
influence as our hubris prevents partners from seeing us as acting with
their collective interest. NSA’s military outlook toward al Qaeda is
understandable, but the insularity of the “intelligence community” has
blocked both domestic and international cooperation as well as respect
for the Constitution. Our winner-take-all commercial and political
culture is shrinking our economic clout as the world develops and we
create a “1984” culture in a divided nation. The intelligence agencies
view their fight as an existential fight for safety, but the
phone-logging program has <span id="_Hlt249792807"
class="anchor"></span>not been necessary in stopping terrorist attacks
[*according to the White House panel’s
report.*](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/19/us/politics/report-on-nsa-surveillance-tactics.html?_r=0)
Others see that there are more options for security in cooperating with
allies and the public by using a wider range of techniques and knowledge
of cultures, languages, religious communities, and sciences beyond
electronics and at the same time protecting our economy.

 More recent events have suggested a review of NSA’s programs and a
report by President Obama due in January. The tech industry has met with
Obama sharing their concerns of how NSA is limiting their viability and
trust. One federal judge has stated that phone meta-data collection is
likely unconstitutional,[ *but another disagreed Dec. 27, possibly
setting up an early Supreme Court
encounter.*](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/28/us/nsa-phone-surveillance-is-lawful-federal-judge-rules.html?hp&_r=0)
[*A White House panel’s review of NSA programs
*](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/19/us/politics/report-on-nsa-surveillance-tactics.html)has
not found the security benefit of stopping a single imminent attack and
made a recommendation that phone companies hold their data longer in
order to be accessed by NSA using warrants. The full report is yet to be
detailed and may leave other forms of data collection by NSA untouched.
It is interesting that NSA is quick to label Snowden a treasonous
traitor when the chain of command in NSA has sworn to protect the
Constitution and the result casts doubt on their oaths.

[Revolutionary Lives in the Making of New South
Africa](http://dsadc.org/revolutionary-lives-in-the-making-of-new-south-africa/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2014**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

Review of *Ruth First and Joe Slovo in the War Against Apartheid*, by
Alan Wieder, Monthly Review Press, 2013.

As the world was saying goodbye to Nelson Mandela in early December, I
had my nose in Alan Wieder’s well-researched new biography *Ruth First
and Joe Slovo in the War Against Apartheid* (Monthly Review, 2013).
First, Slovo and Mandela were part of an ensemble of revolutionary
comrades who together reshaped South Africa from the 1950s to the end of
apartheid in 1991. The book is full of these and other familiar
characters in a level of detail that would impress the most ardent
Talmudic scholar. Wieder’s research involved hours and hours of
interviews and immersing himself in court records, other documents and
the personal papers of Slovo, First and others from the apartheid era.

This article – a summary more than a critique – has the goal of drawing
a profile of revolutionary lives that were fully committed but also full
of contradictions, interesting but also mundane in many ways. Because
their lives individually and jointly tell the story of apartheid and its
liberation, it is impossible to separate the “personal and political” of
these two remarkable historical figures.

Ruth First (<http://www.sahistory.org.za/people/ruth-herloise-first>), a
journalist who was assassinated by the South African security forces
with a mail bomb in 1982, made her mark reporting on the atrocities of
the apartheid government for the *Guardian* and other left-leaning
newspapers, beginning in the mid-1950s. Joe Slovo
(<http://www.sahistory.org.za/people/joe-slovo>), a lawyer, made his
mark challenging the regime by legally defending poor black Africans
against everything from petty crimes to more serious allegations. He
died of leukemia in 1995 while serving as the minister of housing in
Mandela’s government.

The husband and wife political team came to their radical inclinations
quite differently. First was born in South Africa of Jewish socialist
parents who had immigrated to South Africa from Lithuania and Latvia to
escape persecution. Her father became a small businessman in
Johannesburg and did well, allowing Ruth to grow up in middle class
surroundings and to intellectually engage in politics. Joe was born in
Lithuania of poor Yiddish-speaking, observant Jewish parents. Not long
after his family immigrated to South Africa, his mother died, leaving
his father to support and raise several young children. They shifted
from one boarding house to another, the father working at jobs where he
could, but spending time in jail for debts when he had no work.

Ruth went to college from high school; Joe was forced to work. His
lodgings put him among a rag-tag bunch that included some
Zionist-Marxists. Having already abandoned religious Judaism, he also
turned away from Zionism, feeling that the Zionists cared more about
events in Palestine than the oppressive situation going on around them.
Joe became immersed in the latter. It was the 1940s and the coming of
the apartheid era.

The Union of South Africa, formed by merging former British colonies
with those of the Boers (Afrikaners), had been historically racist in
its policies but would become more so after statehood. In 1913, the Land
Act was passed, forbidding blacks from buying land outside the reserves
set aside for them. These were followed by the infamous “pass laws”
(requiring blacks and coloreds to carry ID cards) and other measures to
control the interaction of the races.

The institutionalized racism known as apartheid came dramatically in
1948 when the National Party came to power. Laws
(<http://africanhistory.about.com/library/bl/blsalaws.htm>) were passed
forbidding both sex and marriage between whites and those of other races
and restricting residency of native Africans to townships. In 1950, the
Population Registration Act required every South African to be
classified by race, a law that would form the basis for a totally
racialized society. In 1951, the Native Building Workers Act limited the
places where skilled blacks were allowed to work; and in 1953, the
Reservation of Separate Amenities Act allowed racial segregation in
public facilities and vehicles. In 1956, the Industrial Conciliation Act
forbade formation of racially mixed labor unions and legalized the
reservation of skilled jobs for white workers.

Blacks had formally organized resistance to white repression around the
time of the nation’s founding. The Native National Congress (later the
ANC), founded in 1912, and the Communist Party, with ties to Russian
Bolsheviks and later Stalinists, were the strongest opponents. Nelson
Mandela, Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu, and Chris Hani were among the
ANC’s leaders and would become close allies of First and Slovo, who held
membership in both organizations. These groups led mass protests,
strikes, burned passes and otherwise resisted the repression.

Living a revolutionary life meant social and political circles
overlapped closely for First and Slovo, who had met through CP
activities. Ruth, Wieder says, was a “remarkable journalist” who was
“wholly concerned with identifying and exposing the horrors of racial
rule.” Her most famous story was written in 1951 on the enslavement of
Bethal farm workers. She also reported on the government seizure of
black land, township conditions, and other atrocities. Her stories and
commentaries, it was said, “kept the spark alive.” Her paper, the
*Guardian* (<http://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>) was banned
numerous times, each time to re-emerge under a new name with similar
oppositional stories. She also engaged in political protests,
particularly in support of black women, who felt the brunt of apartheid
strongly. Some noted that her journalism often had a
participant-observer aspect to it, as when she reported on the
Federation of South African Women’s campaign against passes, a campaign
she was herself involved in. Her reporting “provided both motivation and
ground rules for future women’s actions,” according to Wieder. She
mentored young black writers to enter the profession and report from
their own perspectives.

Joe, who had eventually completed law school, traveled around the nation
to defend blacks accused of violating the apartheid laws. He had a
brilliant legal mind and compelling courtroom manner. By the mid-1950s,
his life became more secretive, attending political meetings at night
and sharing only necessary details with Ruth and others. His activities
included planning and abetting massive strikes in protest against
repressive labor laws. First and Slovo were both stalked by the
government and eventually put on trial for treason with scores of black
Africans. Charges were eventually dropped, but in 1963, they fled. Other
major leaders also went into exile, as the ANC had become a banned
political group. Mandela was tried for treason, given a life sentence
and sent to Robben Island.

First and Slovo’s long exile was spent mostly in London, where Wieder
observes they “had a full social life.” One of the contradictions in
these radicals’ lives was their class privilege, which allowed them to
live well even while they fought against the squalor and injustices
others’ experienced. While living in Johannesburg, the family (Joe, Ruth
and their three daughters) had taken annual vacations to the beaches of
Cape Town; they had black domestic help, and otherwise lived a bourgeois
life. Joe, who had grown up very poor, came to enjoy “a good meal and a
cigar,” and both liked to party. They differed from most white South
African bourgeoisie by having a multicultural circle of friends, who
included the other revolutionaries of all races who came to enjoy social
gatherings at their home – something expressly forbidden by law.

In London while exiled, they went to the theater and enjoyed other
cultural events. But “good food and good company did not preclude
politics for Joe Slovo or Ruth First” during their exile. Joe became
involved in recruiting Irish leftists for political propaganda forays
into South Africa, Wieder says, and Ruth continued her “torrid pace of
writing”, including speeches and media work. She produced a special on
Frantz Fanon for the ATV Network in London, and completed research for
and first draft for her book *The Barrel of a Gun*, a socialist critique
of post-colonial African leaders. The book, which emphasized that power
lies in the hands of those who control the means of violence, would
catapult her into the academic world. The book’s complex analysis, which
involved politics, economics and other factors, broke new ground in
explaining post-colonial Africa and was well reviewed in academic
journals. Though having no PhD, she was sought out by the sociology
faculty of Durham University, where she served from 1973 to 1978,
teaching courses on Marx and Weber, as well as the sociology of gender,
the last of these signaling her shift into feminist scholarship and
feminist politics.

Joe’s life became more international, as he shuffled between Europe,
Moscow, Berlin and various African nations interacting with communist
and other leftist political leaders. Joe and Ruth had always held fierce
political differences on some issues, one of them being his support for
Stalinist policies in the USSR. In addition, both had always had
extra-marital affairs, which caused conflict but also a kind of freedom
in their individual pursuits. Though their expatriate life settled into
its own brand of normalcy, both desired to return home and questioned
why ANC leaders weren’t doing more to bring themselves home and resume
the fight against apartheid.

In 1978, exiled comrade Oliver Tambo organized a contingent of ANC
members, including Slovo, to travel to Vietnam for training in guerrilla
warfare. Ruth was living in Maputo, Mozambique, by then and Tambo’s
campaign enticed Joe to also return to Africa. Now at the Center for
African Studies as director of research, Ruth hired young researchers to
assist her with studies in Marx; academic research and writing occupied
most of her time. In the role as director, she was also able to initiate
agricultural projects that required city-bred African students to go
into villages and live with goals to revolutionize agricultural
production. She considered this period to be the most militant and
productive in her life, bringing theory and practice together.

Joe became deputy of the Operations Unit of the ANC after returning from
Vietnam. He trained 20 soldiers at a time, teaching them to destroy oil
refineries and other facilities. Joe’s units were successful in bringing
“huge financial damage” to the regime.” Though gaining renown for these
field operations, Joe came home to Ruth in their comfortable lifestyle,
again pointing out the discrepancy of class relations in revolutionary
work.

With increased coverage of the group’s violence against the state by the
South African press, which demonized the ANC, the government began what
Wieder calls its “reign of assassinations of ANC operatives in both
South Africa and the border states.” Ruth, a “brilliant orator” since
high school, “had a remarkable way with words” and was speaking
frequently in these days. She also continued her scholarship, completing
work on the book *Olive Schreiner* and beginning research for *Black
Gold*; Joe also began to write more and to travel, including a trip to
the Soviet Union. Ruth was in her campus office, chatting with others
around her, when she began to read her mail on the morning of August 17,
1982. One of the envelopes contained a bomb that exploded, killing her
instantly. Those around her were injured but survived. Word of her death
spread around the world quickly and comrades and friends and family
reacted with eulogies, articles and concerts in her name. Heads of state
and other dignitaries from around the world came to her funeral. Ruth’s
friend Ron Segal gave the eulogy, honoring her as a writer
revolutionary, intellectual, feminist and teacher.

Friends surrounded Joe, who was devastated. Those who knew Ruth and Joe
said they always imagined it would be Joe they killed first. After the
funeral, he began a regimen of swimming daily, meetings and writing. He
worked through his grief by writing *Joe Slovo: An Unfinished
Biography*. He returned to his special operations work against the
government, from his new base in Lusaka, Zambia.

The world was changing. The Berlin wall came down in 1989 and soon after
came the disintegration of the Soviet Union. Joe connected these
dramatic changes to possibilities for similar shifts in South Africa.
President de Klerk was giving signals that there would be a new future.
He had released Walter Sisulu and Thabo Mbeki from prison; he unbanned
the ANC; and in February 1990, he released Nelson Mandela. Joe returned
to South Africa in April that year, after 27 years in exile. In
Johannesburg, he would participate in negotiations that became the basis
for the new South African Communist Party. At the same time, he reacted
with culture shock at what he was seeing – blacks and whites on buses
together, talking in the streets, middle class blacks living in white
areas.

Both the ANC and SACP began to redefine themselves to participate openly
in the political process. On July 19, Joe proposed the unilateral
cessation of armed struggle, something that Mandela supported. But there
would be a power struggle within the SACP over the issue, something the
press covered, but the problem eventually was resolved. Mandela’s
election in 1994 brought many of his old comrades into government,
something they could not have imagined decades earlier. Instead of
appointing Joe to the Justice Ministry, as everyone supposed would
happen, Mandela asked him to be Minister of Housing. Joe Slovo, who some
called the “most hated white man in South Africa” took over an agency
still full of staff from the apartheid era. To build trust and good
relations, he established collaborative principles of working and
dispensed with formalities, including a chauffeur. He began to lunch
with the rank and file staff. He summoned leaders from banking, building
industries and civic organizations to develop plans for public housing.

It would be his last mission to put his politics into practice. Joe
Slovo was diagnosed with leukemia in 1994 and died a year later, leaving
his second wife, Helena Dolny and daughters Gillian, Robyn, and Shawn.

*Personal reflection*. Having spent a week or so in Johannesburg four or
five years ago, I read this biography knowing full well that the “new”
South Africa is still a long way from being realized. The wealthy
Afrikaner bankers and industrialists, who brokered the end of apartheid
and to whom Mandela ultimately sold out, still dominate the economy.
Mandela’s government was never able to bring about education,
redistribution of resources, or even better housing for the masses of
poor black Africans before it passed to the hands of his successors, and
neither have they fully accomplished these things. The nation is still
racially divided in many ways for all of its advancements, not the least
of which is its progressive Constitution. And yet there is an admirable
progress and, among those I met of all races, a determination to look
forward, not back. Alan Wieder’s interesting critical account of First
and Slovo’s lives is at once a social history and a biography. In the
end, it reminded me that revolutionaries are real flesh and blood people
– passionate, complicated, imperfect, and with varied levels of success
in what they are able to do given historical circumstances. The lessons
in these and other things, replete through the book’s 390 pages, may
inform our own activist impulses.

To read more about the implications that the South African story has for
the United States, read Arun Gupta’s commentary
<http://truth-out.org/news/item/20893-make-new-york-city-ungovernable-lessons-from-the-anti-apartheid-struggle-in-the-age-of-bill-de-blasio>.

There is renewed interest in South Africa and its lessons for others on
the political left, particularly with regard to the enduring socialist
question, “Can the Left govern”? Others are also chiming in on this
subject.

See Danny Schechter’s new book, [*Madiba A to Z, the Many Faces of
Nelson Mandela*
](http://truth-out.org/progressivepicks/item/20974-mandela-was-unable-to-dismantle-the-white-oligarchy-keeping-south-africa-in-economic-chainshttp:/)

[*Socialism Defended With Wit & Style*](http://dsadc.org/827/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

A book review of ***Why Marx Was Right***, by Terry Eagleton (2011, New
Haven & London). Yale University Press; hard cover, \$25.

One highly intriguing fact about the Marxist theory of revolution is
that for the last century, an enormous number of American conservatives
who know surprisingly little about it have found it remarkably simple to
identify its worst flaws.

When I graduated from elementary school back in 1960, for example, my
libertarian Republican friends and I knew full well that Marx believed
in the virtues of a totalitarian political state and the utter
insignificance of the individual. When I entered college later on, a
number of the earnest Christian liberals I met at my church group at the
University of Michigan were convinced of the fact that Marx was a
complete economic determinist who rejected the notion of freedom. We
Christians might have believed in original sin, of course, and the
extreme Calvinists taught the “innate depravity” of each individual
soul, but at least we differed from the Communists in admiring human
dignity.

Many radical environmental activists who joined in the University of
Michigan’s version of the Earth Day, 1970 teach-ins, similarly, were
painfully aware that Marxists, the same people who had achieved total
political power in the Soviet Union, perversely believed in the human
conquest over nature, despite the damage thus wreaked on the world. And
to be fair to the environmentalists, a few of the campus Marxists who
turned out to protest against our “middle class” environmental protests
in 1970 knew exactly the same thing.

In fairness to Marx and his intellectual legacy, much of what
conservative and liberal critics have always “known” about him is wrong.
In fairness to the critics, on the other hand, Marx was a complicated
19^th^ century thinker with a propensity for embellishing *Capital* with
quotations in ancient Greek, and as a young man he unfortunately
developed an elaborately German sense of humor. Socialists and
Communists since the late 1800s have faced extremely daunting challenges
in translating some of his theories into practice, and for much of the
20^th^ century a big part of the international socialist left took its
marching orders from Stalin’s Soviet Union, where the conservatives had
some good reasons to point to totalitarian abuse by the State.

Was the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and its followers in the
1940s and 1950s basically correct about what Marxism means? Are Tea
Party Republicans or even liberal Democrats today basically correct in
finding Marxism to be an outmoded political ideology, one totally
discredited by the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union? Is Marx one dead
white European male whose latter day followers have been incapable of
appreciating the merits of modern radical movements such as feminism,
environmentalism, gay liberation and the struggle for racial justice?

In *Why Marx Was Right,* the Anglo-Irish literary critic Terry Eagleton
takes on 10 of the most commonly help misconceptions about Marx and
Marxism, and unlike some socialist defenders of the Truth Faith,
Eagleton does so with a good deal of flair, intelligence and wit.

Eagleton himself seems like an unlikely and somewhat contradictory
Marxist. A former associate of Christopher Hitchens in the British
Trotskyist movement, Eagleton also happens to a believing Catholic, and
the dust jacket to this book contains the publisher’s praise for his
previous work *Reason, Faith, and Revolution: Reflects on the God
Debate*. According to a blurb from the *Guardian* , which Yale
University Press chose to quote on the dust jacket, *Reason, Faith and
Revolution* offers a “coruscating brilliant polemic” against the kind of
militant atheism that Hitchens espoused as a reason for George Bush to
make war on “Islamo-Fascism” following the 9/11 attack.

Another recent Eagleton work, judging from the dust jacket, is titled
*On Evil*, and a reviewer for the Irish Times apparently finds it “a
valuable contribution to a debate as old as Adam and Eve and as
contemporary as 9/11 and Abu Ghraib.”

In other words, Eagleton is hardly dogmatic in his defense of Marx, who
was an explicitly atheist thinker, and both as a Catholic and a former
Trotskyist, he expresses serious intellectual reservations about some of
Marx’s historical conclusions. Like most Trotskyists, he expresses
strong condemnation of the bloodshed and totalitarian terror that he
sees as having attended both the Chinese and the Russian revolutions,
while at the same time emphasizing that both revolutions contributed
significantly to economic development for hundreds of millions of
people.

Perhaps because of his Catholicism, perhaps only because of common
sense, Eagleton also emphasizes that for all of its scope, Marxism
cannot be thought of as a “Theory of Everything,” even if many Marxists
have wanted to make it one. He writes:

> The fact that Marxism has nothing very interesting to say about malt
> whiskies or the nature of the unconscious, the haunting fragrance of a
> rose or why there is something rather than nothing, is not to its
> discredit It is not a total philosophy … It has been mostly silent on
> questions of love, death and the meaning of life.”

Yet in the wake of the near-implosion of the capitalist world economy
following the great financial crisis of 2008, Eagleton insists, Marxism
as a way of understanding capitalism and formulating ways to go beyond
it is as relevant as ever. The main reason so many political radicals
rejected it following the Soviet Union’s collapse in 1991, he concludes,
was not because it was no longer relevant — but was because capitalism
at the time seemed invincible. But it doesn’t seem that way today.

Eagleton goes on in this book to examine and refute ten of the most
commonly held misconceptions about Marx and Marxism, including the myth
that Marx – who called the State an instrument of “class oppression” and
called for it ultimately to “wither away” – was somehow an advocate of
an all-powerful government that would negate all individual rights. In
fact, Eagleton argues, Marx was an advocate of a “communist” society
that would foster the flourishing of individual lives and individual
talent, and there are solidly “Marxist” and materialist reasons why the
Bolshevik attempt to establish a revolutionary socialist order in
politically and economically backward Russia, in 1917, was almost fated
to generate gross abuses of individuality and democratic rights instead.

One excellent feature of *Why Marx Was Right* is Eagleton’s obvious
familiarity with features of Marx’s thought and Marxist practice that
have never come to the attention of most American conservatives and
anti-socialist liberals. What may be even better about the book for the
average reader is that Eagleton is a prominent literary critic, and an
Irish Catholic one to boot. As such, he has flair for lively writing and
wit that Marx, for all his intellectual virtues, sometimes lacked.

Whether Eagleton’s prose can match that of other Irish writers such as
George Bernard Shaw or Oscar Wilde is debatable. But in this book,
Eagleton has produced a body of pro-socialist arguments that are fun to
read, not simply “important.”

[*THE JOYS OF LEAFLETTING and DC-DSA’s Fight Against Further Cuts in
Food
Stamps*](http://dsadc.org/the-joys-of-leafletting-and-dc-dsas-fight-against-further-cuts-in-food-stamps/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

I was walking down Connecticut Ave. near Dupont Circle when she
approached to ask me for seventy-five cents. Supposedly it was for a
Metro fare to Silver Spring, which I doubted. Yet today I handed over
the change anyway, for I had a hidden agenda.

“How do you feel about Congress cutting food stamps?” I asked. She said
it was terrible; she knew many people who needed food stamps to eat;
they’d have a really hard time on reduced benefits. Congress is crazy to
do this, she said.

So I showed her Metro DC DSA’s flyer against further cuts in food stamp
funding under the next Farm Bill, with phone numbers where people can
call to protest to Congress about the proposed changes. And she took
some flyers to distribute to her friends — in fact, she asked me for 75
of them.

I had a similar experience when I asked the medical technician in my
doctor’s office about how she felt about Congress cutting the food stamp
program. She replied with a small lecture about what it would mean for
single mothers trying to raise two or three children. “They’re going to
get money to feed their children by any means necessary, “ she
predicted; this meant more street crime and prostitution ahead. When I
showed her the DSA flyers she took 35 of them, and said she’d pass them
along to people in her church.

A waiter at the restaurant where I went after my annual checkup agreed
it was insane for the government to reduce food stamp benefits given the
slack growth in jobs in this economy; he took flyers for himself and a
friend or two. A homeless street vendor near my downtown office scanned
the contents of the flyer, nodded to himself, and asked for 100 to hand
out to people in his mother’s neighborhood in Anacostia. A security
guard took 75 to give to her neighbors. And when I knocked at the back
door of a downtown evangelical church, the middle-aged white man who
answered said he needed food stamps himself; he’d take 30 flyers to hand
to others in the congregation.

Some long-time socialists who’ve contributed a lot to DSA over the years
hate handing out radical flyers to strangers. I can’t blame them. It
seems undignified; it takes a bit of gall if you’re a naturally shy
person; you’re basically intruding on someone else’s space, and some
people resent it. Also it’s easy to feel hopeless when you’re trying to
press a bit of socialist propaganda on someone who really doesn’t want
to read it.

But when our chapter’s Steering Committee in early December decided to
authorize the preparation and distribution of a DSA flyer urging local
residents to call Congress in opposition to further cuts in Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) funding — SNAP being the new name
for the old food stamps program – I believe we hit on a message that
many people in DC, Northern Virginia and suburban Maryland actually do
want to read.

According to recent articles in the *Washington Post* and the *Baltimore
Sun*, as well as information on the web sites of charitable food bank
organizations in our region, some 101,000 D.C. residents have recently
depended on food stamps to some degree for their basic nutritional
needs. In Maryland, the USDA has found an estimated 720,000 people to be
“food insecure,” and even in Loudoun County, Virginia, which reportedly
has the highest average per-capital income in the United States, some
82,000 people went to church and charitable food banks last year for
some of their groceries.

Nationwide, upwards of 47 million Americans have received food stamps in
recent years – a number that conservative Republicans and not a few
congressional Democrats now seem eager to cut, by slashing billions of
dollars in funding from SNAP expenditures in future years. On November
1, 2013, food stamp recipients and hunger advocacy groups got a taste of
austerity to come when Congress, under the 2013 sequestration deal,
allowed food stamp funding to drop by \$5 billion from its previous
all-time high.

Because of the large numbers of needy people involved, and probably also
because of the wide coverage that food stamp and hunger issues have
recently received in the local and national media, a big fraction of the
people living in the Metro DC area were already concerned about the food
stamp issue by last December. Many local residents therefore have
willingly taken our flyers. The local DSA Steering Committee authorized
expenditures for the printing of 500 flyers, initially; since then,
individual DSA members acting independently have printed up roughly
1,500 more.

By late December, nearly all these had been handed out – in some cases
to local DSA members, in many other cases, to sympathetic non-socialists
who have promised to distribute them more widely to friends, family and
community – not because they necessarily agree with democratic
socialism, but because of their deep concern about the pain that further
SNAP funding reductions will cause.

Can DSA members, either locally or nationally, hope to build “socialism”
or a socialist movement by trying to rally members of the public to call
on a conservative-leaning Congress to protect a “liberal” and not
especially generous welfare program – namely SNAP?

Not directly, no. Our flyers opposing food stamp cuts, although they
mention DSA’s name and give readers directions to our local and national
web sites, say nothing at all about socialism or even the major flaws in
capitalism that make hunger and malnutrition and poverty so surprisingly
present in the world’s richest capitalist society.

However, what some of us are hoping is that by distributing these flyers
in significant numbers, and by urging readers to contact Congress soon
to save existing SNAP funds, we may help to rally local low-wage working
people, the jobless and homeless, and enlightened middle-class liberals
to act politically in their own class interest.

At the DSA national convention last October, delegates approved of a
resolution identifying the struggle against “neo-liberal” budget
austerity as one central priority for democratic socialists this year.
Fighting Congress to save food stamps from further reductions is only a
part of that anti-austerity struggle, but some of us in the chapter hope
that it will support the larger anti-austerity struggle.

Beyond this, several DSA activists at the national level have recently
expressed growing interest in the political theories of Antonio Gramsci,
an influential Marxist thinker imprisoned by Mussolini in the 1920s and
1930s. Our chapter’s food stamp flyers, in whatever limited fashion, are
partly an attempt to put into practice a little of what Gramsci wrote
about the need for socialists to wage a “counter-hegemonic” struggle in
basically conservative capitalist societies, such as Italy in the 1920s
and the United States today.

As Michael Harrington, one of the cofounders of DSA, noted in his last
*book, Socialism: Past and Future**,*** Gramsci, a fiery would-be
revolutionary himself, played an important role in the 1930s in
recognizing that in most prosperous western capitalist societies, the
majority of working people are not revolutionary, contrary to Marx’s
predictions from the 19^th^ century.

Under those circumstances, Gramsci wrote, socialists need to recognize
that capitalists combat the spread of socialist ideas not only through
military and economic coercion – though these are important – but also
through moral and intellectual means, through what Gramsci called the
“hegemony” of capitalist values as promoted by the press, the
entertainment industry, the established political parties and in many
cases the established churches.

To make change under these difficult circumstances, Gramsci argued,
socialists must work to create a “counter-hegemony” to capitalism by
formulating and defending key moral values, in almost the way that the
Catholic Church in Gramsci’s Italy had long formulated and popularized
conservative and anti-leftist ones. Gramsci died in 1937, long before
the Italian Communist Party (the PCI) could put his ideas about
“counter-hegemony” into practice. But after World War II had put an end
to Italian fascism, the PCI – a tiny minority party before — achieved a
surprisingly healthy growth and considerable political influence in
Italy by doing just that.

Writing personally, and not necessarily on behalf of everyone in the
DC-DSA steering committee, I am hoping that by taking public positions
on such obvious moral issues as opposition to food stamp cuts for the
poor, DSA at the local level can begin to carve out a small amount of
“counter-hegemonic” space for socialist ideas people in the metropolitan
area who have the most to lose from the capitalist politics of
austerity.

I also think it’s obvious that simply fighting for SNAP funding this
year can only be a small step that direction. But if our local chapter
can follow up our effort on SNAP by continued efforts to promote Rep.
John Conyer’s “jobs for all bill” and the notion of a financial
transaction tax to make further budget austerity unnecessary, I think we
have a chance of helping local low-wage workers to Fight the Powers That
Be.

And to the extent we can produce and distribute additional literature
that tells DC residents things that they actually want to hear, I hope
that some of us can find “joy in leafleting,” while helping to build
public awareness of DSA and its political positions on more complicated
topics.

[Working People Can Win: A review of Sam Pizzigati’s “The Rich Don’t
Always
Win”](http://dsadc.org/working-people-can-win-a-review-of-sam-pizzigatis-the-rich-dont-always-win/)

 ***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2014**

** ***By Kurt Stand*

Sisyphus was condemned to forever roll a huge rock to the top of a hill,
then, just before reaching the summit, watch it roll down again. A myth
from ancient times that speaks to much of what those struggling for
economic and social justice experience with victories won rare and
all-too-fleeting. The weight of unjust power by the few means that
inequality and injustice persist despite the best efforts of so many to
bring about change.

 Yet it need not be so for it has not always been so – a point well made
by Sam Pizzigati in his book, *The Rich Don’t Always Win* (Seven Seas
Press, 2012). The book’s subtitle, “The Forgotten Triumph over
Plutocracy that Created the American Middle Class,1900-1970,” serves as
a reminder that the summit can be reached. He provides a history that
bears repeating in this era of seeming neo-liberal invincibility.
Economic policy leading to the destruction of jobs and pensions, the
breakdown of communities and the loss of good schools, stemmed from
fiscal and tax policies that prioritized ending inflation as opposed to
ending unemployment – a direction that has been dominant since Ronald
Reagan’s triumph in 1980.

 Foreshadowed by initiatives undertaken by the Ford and Carter
administrations, those policies did not come out of the blue. Rather
they were implemented as a reaction by capital to something that had
been won – strong unions and social welfare systems that resulted in a
steady decline in poverty levels, wage standards that put college
education and homeownership within the reach of most. It was a reaction
by the wealthy to redistributionist tax policies that limited the gap
between the rich and working people and prevented the degree of
inequality of income (and therefore power) that undermines any pretense
of political democracy. Pizzigati, currently at the Institute for Policy
Studies, was long active in the labor movement and worked for the
National Education Association for over twenty years, serving as the
union’s director of publications. At 384 pages, this book may seem too
lengthy, but it is well written and the combination of detail,
substantive information and anecdotes illustrating past views and
struggles, give his narrative a sense of flow that most political and
historical writing lacks.

Pizzigati begins his story at the end of the 19^th^ century. The defeat
of the combined Democratic/Populist campaign of William Jennings Bryan
left the country firmly in the hands of the handpicked representative of
business, William McKinley. The rich and powerful not only had one of
their own in the White House; thinly veiled corruption meant that the
Senate and the House, most state governments, and the judiciary, were
also firmly in their pockets. What followed were a set of measures
designed to prevent challenges to the rule of capital such as those that
exploded from time to time in the decades after the Civil War. Now
protected – by law, by police power, by business monopoly, by banking
consolidation, by government action and inaction – such resistance
seemed to face dim prospects. As well, direct power brandished by
authorities was augmented by a dominant worldview that gave credence to
the idea that the wealthy deserved their riches, the poor deserved their
poverty. Extremes of inequality of income and political power followed
that seemed unstoppable.

But popular movements refused to give in to despair or to stop
organizing against the prevailing order. Pizzigati recounts how a
mixture of reformers and revolutionaries – muckraker journalists,
socialists, moderate and radical unionists, the “settlement” movement
amongst the urban poor, farmer and sharecropper activists, wealthy
individuals appalled at the selfishness and ignorance of their peers,
academics who challenged the prevailing wisdom, and numerous others
organized to give voice to the voiceless, strength to the marginalized,
and a change in the climate of opinion throughout the country. There was
never any formal organizational or political unity among these varied
movements. To the contrary, activists had strong differences that were
often fiercely argued. Nonetheless, these movements did interact with
each other and most never lost sight of the fact that the principal
danger facing US society was that of concentrated wealth. Thus,
cumulatively, these various organizations and individuals reinforced
positive, democratic changes in society.

 By 1912 all candidates ran on a reform platform. Theodore Roosevelt led
a split within the Republican Party based on a call for more regulation
of the economy, forcing the Republican incumbent, William Howard Taft,
to campaign on a program that most Democrats, let alone Republicans,
would today find hard to accept. Eugene Debs, the Socialist Party
candidate, won 6% of the national vote, a figure that would have been
higher if the Democratic Party candidate Woodrow Wilson had not stolen
large parts of the Socialist platform with calls for social welfare and
support for taxes on inherited wealth.

 Real change began to take place during the Wilson Administration –
changes furthered but also cut short by the experience of World War I.
It was a time too that saw reform and radical movements reach new
heights of strength and new depths of mutual antagonism. Those who
sought to work within the system through support of the war saw the
imposition of taxes on wealth, the development of protections for labor
– and the expansion of union membership – overcoming business opposition
that previously had kept such changes at bay. Those who condemned the
war saw in it the growth of an authoritarian corporate state that used
national security to suppress dissent, shut down debate of radical
alternatives, and promote a militarism necessarily hostile to democratic
values.

 That prophecy proved true. Violence swept through the land when the war
ended, with an anti-union, anti-radical, racist offensive across the
country that put reaction back in the saddle, undid most of the reforms
that had been won and destroyed labor’s hard won gains. Progressive
reform and left-wing radical movements were divided within themselves
and among themselves, and the loss of what had been painfully gained led
to demoralization. The administrations of Harding, Coolidge and Hoover
saw business get what it wanted no matter what the social cost. In
consequence, according to figures Pizzigati cites, by 1928, 1% of the
population owned 23.9% of the nation’s wealth. Such extreme inequality,
in turn, contributed to the stock market crash, ushering in the Great
Depression, the worst economic decline in US history.

But the story doesn’t end there. Labor and social reform movements —
Socialist, Communist and independent left organizers, middle-class
liberals and activists of all stripes — drew on the legacy of protest,
resistance and action from proceeding decades and this time achieved
more lasting success. Real tax reform did lead to wealth redistribution
and a more equitable society, the labor movement did grow in size and
strength, regulations with teeth helped limit the power of banks and
created a genuine social welfare safety net. For a little more than a
decade, from the early 1930s through the mid-1940s, the rich and
powerful were forced to retreat as working people won victories that
seemed unimaginable before (as they may seem unimaginable today). Real
price controls, controls on profits, and maximum incomes all received
genuine consideration as potential policies. Economic planning during
World War II created a framework that prevailed until the mid-1970s.

 This framework was so long-lasting, Pizzigati explains, because it
rested on two critical foundations,

 \[First\] … a system of sharply graduated progressive tax rates that
placed the lion’s share of the tax burden on those most able to bear it.
The second: a vital trade union presence in workplaces all across the
United States. The tax system bankrolled the public services that
enabled entry into America’s new middle class. The union presence forced
employers to share the wealth the post war economy was creating.
Together, complementing each other, unions and progressive taxes
prevented the accumulation of private fortunes powerful enough to
sabotage the nation’s new economic order. (p. 13)

 These reforms were roughly co-extensive with Franklin Roosevelt’s four
presidential terms of office, but they can neither be reduced to the
fact of his mixture of compassion and pragmatism, nor to Eleanor
Roosevelt’s more committed vision of social justice. Rather their
achievements, the New Deal itself, were the result of millions of men
and women understanding that democratic progress is possible and acting
on that conviction. True, the power structure did not change during
those years, nor did the class struggle disappear. Rather, those were
the golden years of capitalism, yet golden years in which working people
had more security, more possibility of advancement than ever before.
Contradictions still existed, but the social struggles of the 1950s-70s
were able to build on that already created foundation.

 Published in 1962 and 1963, Betty Friedan’s *The Feminine Mystique*,
highlighting the continued second-class status of women, Rachel Carson’s
*Silent Spring* focusing attention on the emerging environmental dangers
posed by our profit making industrial system, Michael Harrington’s *The
Other America*, pointing out the continued poverty amidst plenty, all
took for granted that change could happen, that the “rich don’t always
win,” because they shared a legacy of popular victory that was still in
living memory. In a sense this also animated the civil rights movement’s
battle against racial discrimination, the burgeoning anti-war movement,
as well as the labor uprisings of farm workers and public service
workers left behind in the previous wave of organizing gains. And so too
it was the spirit behind an emerging youth culture and critical
literary, arts and music scene that flourished (parallel to the
flourishing of the New Left) from the late 1950s through the early 1970s
as people felt able to ask more out of life than the existing system
offered.

 Yet the period of popular gains were to come to an end. Reaction
returned with a vengeance and set the tone for the realities we now
encounter. Pizzagati points out that in 2007, on the eve of the
financial collapse and the Great Recession – with an impact that we live
with still – 1% of the country owned 23.5% of the wealth – almost the
same as in 1928. The causes for that reversal are legion, involving
changes in the business cycle and the introduction of new technologies
(with an impact already evident during Kennedy’s first term of office)
that undermined former centers of progressive power at a time when the
labor movement had become complacent. At first unwilling to confront new
challenges, labor was later too weak to do so successfully.

 To that we can add that those in power full well understood the
connection between popular power and equality – and so when social
movements sought to build upon the New Deal by establishing genuine
economic as well as social equality for all, business interests drew a
line in the sand and were able to use various forms of prejudice, fear
and insecurity to build political support for a retreat from the gains
working people had made. The political victories won by the Business
Roundtable following its 1972 founding mark the success of that
strategy. Finally, the expansion of the US imperial order with the onset
of the Cold War served as the Achilles heel of US progressivism,
creating a framework that undermined democratic rule and opened the door
for corporate power to reassert itself more strongly than ever. Such a
reassertion of militarism has been a central thread in mainstream
politics since that power was shaken by resistance to the Vietnam War.

 While understanding the causes of defeat of working people’s movements
are important, Pizzigati’s book makes a powerful argument that it is
more important is to understand the basis of the victory that was
gained. Today’s organizing among Walmart and fast food workers, the
demands for more equitable taxing, universal health and guaranteed
pensions, for banking regulations and environmental protection, for
voting rights and immigration rights, for peace and military spending
cuts, for civil liberties and equality in all facets of life may be seen
in the not-too-distant future as harbingers of a more just society that
is coming. Such movements will focus on different issues and objectives
and frame their understanding of society, their short-range and
long-range goals differently as well.

 Reformers and radicals, movements of the urban poor, of immigrants, of
university students, of already organized workers will all necessarily
emphasize varying needs and develop varying organizations. There is
neither the possibility nor the need to any formal unity amongst these,
for strength today can grow out of the diversity of forms of progressive
social protest. Nonetheless some unifying centers of ideas and goals are
needed – and Pizzigati’s work demonstrates the centrality of
redistributionist tax policies and a strong trade union movement as the
underlying basis for power counter to capital that can make all forms of
progress, for a democracy rooted in equality possible.

 Sisyphus had one break in his labor – when Orpheus in search of
Eurydice played music so beautiful that even death paused. The moment
any forever is broken stands as proof that what is need not always be
so. Our labor for a better world is not – has not been – endless
repetitions of the same; struggle made the world a better place at one
time in history and can do so again. Allowing ourselves to hear the
music of that possibility will allow us to see – and act – so that what
may be, can be.

Resources:Sam Pizzagatti edits a weekly on-line publication: Too Much “A
commentary on Excess and Inequality
([*toomuchonline.org/*](http://toomuchonline.org/)‎). “Antidotes to
Avarice: A 2013 Top Ten,” was posted on December 12.

 

His articles can be found at
[*Inequality.org*](http://inequality.org/author/sam-pizzigati/)

Joshua Freeman, *Working-Class New York* (Life and Labor Since World War
II) (The New Press, 2000) provides a survey of the same time period as
Pizzigati in a localized area. While focusing more evenly on labors
gains and losses, the points he and Pizzigati make reinforce each other.
