***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from Midsummer 2013 Issue**

**Archived November 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*DC Metro DSA’s Midsummer Newsletter: Nuts and Bolts for Backing a
Socialist
Candidate*](http://dsadc.org/dc-metro-dsas-midsummer-newsletter-nuts-and-bolts-for-backing-a-socialist-candidate/)

 

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the midsummer edition of the *Washington Socialist***, the
monthly email newsletter of the Metro DC Democratic Socialists of
America.

As has become traditional (for at least two years!) our midsummer issue,
covering July and August, is published on Bastille Day. Though
[*historians have
tagged*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/5-myths-about-the-french-revolution/2015/07/09/6f27c6f0-25af-11e5-b72c-2b7d516e1e0e_story.html)
many of the myths that Bastille Day embodies as just that – myths – it
is still a day honoring a singular event in modern history. In fact, by
the account of many historians, modernity began in 1789. The enthusiasts
who seized power in Europe’s largest nation intuited a need for broad,
consultative re-definition of the terms of life, exchange and work if
this new thing were to be more than just another transfer of power from
the old powerful to the new powerful.

The level of industrialization and alienation of labor that would
animate Marx, Engels and the First International were decades in the
future and already more advanced across the Channel, but the French
people’s response to the need for change in 1789 was a singularity,
premature or not.

**BELLWETHER**: Sometimes the “threat of a good example” (Chomsky) can
bring progress instead of pushback. A statewide bill for paid sick leave
in Maryland has foundered in the General Assembly for three straight
years. But the actions of Montgomery County’s council June 23 in
[*passing a strong county
measure*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/md-politics/montgomery-county-joins-other-localities-providing-paid-sick-leave/2015/06/23/6af506d0-19e1-11e5-ab92-c75ae6ab94b5_story.html)
on paid sick leave might push the legislators to bring the state bill
out of the death panels – er, committees – in next spring’s session.
Recognizing how Montgomery can be a bellwether for the state, a robust
coalition of county and state organizations and unions led by the
Baltimore-based [*Jobs Opportunity Task Force/Working
Matters*](http://www.jotf.org/) coalition worked the issue hard and
coordinated closely, meeting with council members both friendly and
hostile and defusing potential problems as the bill proceeded through
committee consideration to a full vote with remarkable speed. Your
correspondent, a volunteer peripheral observer to this operation, was
stunned and thrilled to watch the pros at work. The good example of
Montgomery, which may be replicated later this summer in Prince George’s
(though it may be a heavier lift) could set a tone for statewide success
in the 2016 session.

**ON DC DSA’S PLATE in July and August**: In a summer galvanized by
Senator Bernie Sanders’ challenge to the Democratic establishment, the
Metro DC local is mobilizing with National DSA to support the avowed
democratic socialist candidate via an independent expenditure, [**We
Need Bernie**](http://www.dsausa.org/weneedbernie). (What’s an
independent expenditure? A political action for or against a candidate
done without coordination with any candidate’s committee)

A training session for those wanting to be involved in *We Need Bernie*
is scheduled for the local’s **August special two-part membership
meeting**  Sunday, August 9, 2015, 1:30 p.m. to 4 at the [*Watha T.
Daniel/Shaw Neighborhood Library (WTD Meeting
Room)*](http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&hl=en&q=1630+7th+St+NW%2C+Washington%2C+DC%2C+20001%2C+us)
1630 7th St NW, Washington, DC across the street from the Shaw-Howard
Metrorail station on the Green Line. A visiting discussant (TBA) on the
“Evolving Politics of Climate Change” (1:30 – 2:30), will be followed by
a 1-Hour Training Session on “How Local DSAers Can Canvass for Bernie
Sanders” (2:30 – 3:30). Check the Meetup site for updates as the date
approaches.

The training session is recommended because DSA’s enthusiasm for a
socialist’s campaign within one of the capitalist parties has to be
tempered by election law. But trained DSA members can act as organized
individuals on behalf of Bernie Sanders’ candidacy at public events and
the local will actively seek locations where that can happen – tabling,
canvassing or leafleting. Watch the [*Meetup
site*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/) for opportunities to engage in
these activities, many of them on weekends at farmers’ markets and the
like.

The **Socialist Salon** in July (July 30) examines the white racist
right that is the quasi-organized force behind individual instance of
outrage like the mass murder in Charleston’s venerable black church.
It’s 6:30 p.m. at Hunan Dynasty, 215 Pennsylvania Ave SE but (as always)
check the [*Meetup site*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/) for fresh
information; note that it is the fifth Thursday this month, not the
third Thursday as it typically is.

The **Socialist Happy Hour** at Luna Grill in Dupont Circle takes place
the day before the Salon, July 29. Relax and talk about socialism – or
not – starting at 6:30 p.m., 1301 Connecticut Ave. NW.

The **Socialist Book Group** meets Sunday, Aug. 16 at 3 p.m. to discuss
Steve Fraser’s book, [*The Age of
Acquiescence*](https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Age_of_Acquiescence.html?id=s-9MBAAAQBAJ&source=kp_cover).
The group meets at the Kogod Courtyard of the National Portrait Gallery,
8^th^ and F. Streets NW right next to Gallery Place Metrorail station on
the Yellow/Green and Red lines.

The **August Socialist Salon**, still in formation, will examine the
sovereign debt crises of Greece and Puerto Rico, at whatever stage they
are at on August 20, when the Salon will take place (likely 6:30 p.m. at
Hunan Dynasty, 215 Pennsylvania Ave. SE, but check the Meetup site
closer to the date).

Updated information on all these events are found at the Metro DC DSA
[*Meetup site.*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/222712527/)

**OTHER UPCOMING EVENTS OF NOTE:**\
*IMMEDIATE*: On our publication day, our comrades at DC Jobs with
Justice [*hold a public
hearing*](https://actionnetwork.org/events/workers-rights-board-public-hearing-on-just-hours)
on “just hours” – giving more control over work hours and lives to
workers who are currently at the mercy of arbitrary scheduling and
unilateral management reduction of hours. It’s **today, July 14**, 6
p.m. at Pennsylvania Avenue Baptist Church, 3000 Pennsylvania Avenue SE,
Washington, DC 20020

*THIS WEEKEND*: A group of DCDSA members recently got a briefing from
staffers at the Venezuelan Embassy about conditions in that country
(under considerable economic and rhetorical attack by the US). Those
briefed recommend an upcoming public event at the Embassy, a panel
discussion on *The Latin American Alternative: 16 Years of Progressive
Transformations in Venezuela and Latin America* **Saturday, July 18th**,
3:00, at the Bolivarian Hall at the Venezuelan Embassy (2445
Massachusetts Ave. NW.).  Confirmed discussants are George
Ciccariello-Maher, an assistant professor of political science at Drexel
University in Philadelphia and author of *We Created Chávez: A People’s
History of the Venezuelan Revolution*, and Mark Weisbrot, co-director of
the Center for Economic and Policy Research, in Washington, DC.

*AUGUST*: [*Progressive Maryland*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/),
long a solid coalition group in Maryland but known mostly as being based
in Montgomery County until recently, is working to set up a companion
chapter in Prince George’s County. An organizing committee has met
several times in the past month and a date for an interest meeting has
just been set: **Thursday, August 13**, 6:30-8:30 p.m. The location is
TBA; check the site (above) for updates. South county Pastor Delman
Coates, Heather Mizeur’s running mate in last year’s gubernatorial
primary, is confirmed as keynoter.

**RESOURCE RECOVERY**: Here’s a link to where to donate to rebuild those
black churches in the South that have burned:
[*https://cccathedralstl.dntly.com/campaign/2571\#/donate*](https://cccathedralstl.dntly.com/campaign/2571#/donate)

****IN THIS ISSUE:****

Then there’s the other debt problem – the singular situation of **Puerto
Rico**, also staggered by overhanging debt but unable to seek bankruptcy
like US cities and counties because it’s considered a state. Not in the
important ways, but in the ways that Congress decreed to help big banks
lavish loans on the quasi-colony without risk of loss. The DSA National
Political Committee, on the initiative of our co-chair and NPC member
Jose Gutierrez, issued a statement calling for the US government (and a
reluctant GOP Congressional majority) to restructure the commonwealth’s
public debt. [*Read complete article\
*](http://dsadc.org/the-united-states-must-not-turn-puerto-rico-into-the-next-greece/)\
DSA’s July general meeting heard the veteran public power manager Dave
Freeman upbraid his fellow managers in public power for forgetting their
mandate and choosing safe, legacy fossil fuels over the clear necessity
for renewables. The cowboy-hatted octogenarian set a clear vision of
**the public-ness of public power** and its future. Andy Feeney and
Woody Woodruff provide this account with a flavor of Freeman’s witty,
acerbic perspective. [*Read complete
article.*](http://dsadc.org/public-power-is-a-socialist-success-story-says-former-head-of-tva-but-todays-managers-are-flubbing-their-chance-to-lead-a-green-revolution/)

There is a clear path for Sen. Bernie Sanders to win not only the
Democratic nomination but the presidency, says Bill Mosley – because his
agenda is that of the country’s hard-pressed voters. Mosley traces the
admittedly difficult threading of obstacles that could result in a
**President Sanders**, and urges socialists and other progressives to
act resolutely, with analogies to the storied California gubernatorial
campaign of Upton Sinclair. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/bernie-sanders-can-win/)

Left orthodoxy holds that reducing taxes to free the invisible hand of
growth and innovation is a blind alley, a mask for accumulation by
elites. Kameron Burt argues a contrarian position, suggesting that
**accumulation can help enable “the innovative potential of the working
class.”** He invokes Piketty and others to suggest that the suffocating
debt that can result stifles working-class opportunities to create, for
instance, worker co-ops. Public action to fuel these worker-based
enterprises is needed, he argues. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/the-effect-of-debt-and-risk-isnt-only-about-big-banks/)

Every new revelation about the **Trans Pacific Partnership** points to
incipient corporate victories and worker oppression, Andy Feeney
observes in this account of how the trade deal could cripple the US
Postal Service’s ability to broaden its revenue streams to stay alive in
the age of the mature Internet. Innovative plans such as banking
services, backed by the postal unions if not by Congress or USPS
leadership, would be stifled under the TPP. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/how-the-tpp-could-damage-the-u-s-postal-service/)

Nobody knows right now what the endgame will be at next year’s
Democratic National Convention – or if there will be one. Undeterred,
Woody Woodruff unveils a dream vision about **Bernie Sanders’ news
conference** as the convention opens and where he might stand at that
point in the campaign.[ *Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/bernie-sanderss-news-conference-at-the-2016-democratic-convention-a-dream-vision/)

There are plenty of ways to help the children of poverty avoid
marginalization as they grow to youth and then adulthood. A panel at the
Economic Policy Institute made it clear that **early childhood
education**, in its broadest sense, is a key strategy. Andy Feeney
presents the arguments of the expert panel, including some who would be
considered conservative in other respects. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/epi-forum-addresses-class-race-social-inequalities-in-kindergarten-and-how-pre-k-programs-can-lessen-them/)

**Good Reads** – This rather extensive edition of Good Reads probably
should be called the Bernie Edition because the socialist candidate has
been so much in the news and left commentary. But there are takes on the
Greek crisis, the passivity of the oppressed, an historical
contextualization of the Charleston church massacre, and the role of
violence in maintaining global order as well. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-midsummer-socialists/)

**You can read  past articles in the *Washington Socialist* on this
website where they are archived,** [***dsadc.org ***](http://dsadc.org/)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
<woodlanham@gmail.com>.

[*Dublin keynoters offer Marxist explanations for economic collapse but
leave women
out*](http://dsadc.org/dublin-keynoters-offer-marxist-explanations-for-economic-collapse-but-leave-women-out/)

Sunday, July 14th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist*&lt;&gt;Midsummer 2013**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

Marx and Engels’ ideas framed a world gathering of leftist communication
scholars in Dublin in late June where 1,400 of us came to explore the
theme “Crises, ‘Creative Destruction’ and the Global Power and
Communication Orders.”  Held at Dublin City University, the meeting of
International Association of Media and Communication Research (IAMCR)
had a number of notable headline speakers worthy of sharing with our
socialist readers.

Ireland’s President Michael D. Higgins, a former college professor and
political leader, [*electrified the
audience*](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZJD2ctD323A&feature=youtu.be)
in an opening address by critiquing neoliberalism and decrying the rise
of communication conglomerates and the concentrated ownership that they
have produced.  As he recounted the litany of problems this process has
spawned, I mused at his [*complex
understanding*](http://www.irishtimes.com/news/broadcasting-in-crisis-says-president-1.1442609)
of the situation and his forthrightness in talking about it in what can
only be called radical terms.  What a refreshing turn to hear this from
the president of a nation!

On June 27, John Bellamy Foster, sociologist on the University of Oregon
faculty and editor of the *Monthly Review* journal, responded to the
conference theme in a keynote that focused on the intersection of the
communications revolution in relation to darker processes.  Foster
called the phenomenon a “crossing of planetary boundaries.”  Economic
and environmental crises, he said, have intersected to bring us to a
point never before known in human history.

With regard to economics, he said, the financialization process has made
an unprecedented shift over three decades such that the financial sector
has become dominant.  This has occurred in such a way that money
produces more money without the intervention of commodities, whose use
value has become displaced by raw speculation.  Foster observed that
large corporations now control so much surplus profit they don’t know
what to do with it.  It is estimated to be in the trillions, and it is
not trickling back into the broader economy.

With regard to the environment, he said, we are seeing the destruction
of nature’s real value to promote exchange value of its resources.  Half
of all species are expected to become extinct by the end of this
century.  Carbon emissions are reaching the point of no return as we see
an accelerated melting of polar icecaps and other dramatic changes with
ever-increasing rises in earth’s temperatures.

High technologies were supposed to generate prosperity.  In fact,
economies continue to stagnate.  “Go green” with expanded use of digital
technology was the mantra to convince us that technology would reduce
consumption of natural resources.  In fact, we are consuming more. 
Communication is today little more than an appendage of capital markets,
seen, for example, in the Internet’s commercialization.  Communication
companies are giant monopolies.

Foster turned to Shumpeter’s explication of Marx and Engel’s notion of
“creative destruction” (originally put forth in the *Communist
Manifesto*, 1848), a term that refers to the way that capitalist
economic development emerges from the destruction of whatever economic
order came before it.  Today, monopolies undermine the institutional
framework of capitalism with their surplus profits that do not flow back
into the economy.  This is seen most profoundly in the cheapening of
labor, which is suffering.  People are revolting against these realities
on a “scale not seen since 1968,” Foster said, as he referred to Occupy
Wall Street, and recent revolts in Turkey and Brazil.  As for the role
of intellectuals, Foster believes that “we must not just describe the
destruction of the world but enter into the posing of new
possibilities.” He ended without so much as a glimmer of what those
might include – we are thus challenged to pursue them in his articles
and books.

On June 28, political theorist Jodi Dean, from the Hobart and William
Smith Colleges, explored what she called “communicative capitalism,”
which offered a scathing critique of social networking, hailed by many
as providing a new public sphere. Dean’s central thesis is that this new
digital phenomenon is no more than “communicative capitalism”, which is
characterized by three key features.

The first is a change in the form of utterance, i.e., an exploitation of
communication by promoting the belief that “messages are contributions”
that matter, and that all messages have value (be they jokes or
brilliant opinions). The second is a decline in symbolic efficiency,
i.e., a lessening of the meaning of symbols that we have held in
common.  Communities are held together by systems of shared symbols,
whether they be flags, artwork, or other familiar icons.  By contrast,
social networking supports the notion that circulating a photo or
another image carries the same level of shared meaning with it that as
those emerging from more traditional histories, sufferings, or other
experiences.  In addition, social networkers also assume that the image
represents an actual message, i.e., an articulated explanation.  She
rejects this assumption, which she believes is promulgated by a
materialist society shaped by advertising, public relations and other
communication forms empty of real meaning.  The third characteristic of
communicative capitalism, according to Dean, is reflexivity, i.e., the
constant reconsideration of what and who we are and what we believe. 
“Nothing is ever settled, we don’t really make a decision or take a
stand,” she said.  As a result, people are unengaged in their social and
political milieux.

One of the more interesting aspects of Dean’s analysis was her foray
into the capitalist dimensions of her topic.  Google, Amazon, Facebook,
Twitter and other popular websites are not only hugely wealthy from our
participation in their offerings but they also commodify our
communication with them by accumulating metadata on us that they market
to others.  Dean emphasized that the profit and power dimensions of
social networking (or eCommerce) are not always obvious to those who
think they are engaging in social change by using them.

In a spirited exchange with the audience during Q & A, Dean added that
so-called political activism on the Internet has not brought about any
real (structural) changes.  She gave some compelling examples. The
celebrated Arab Spring that emerged in 2010 wasn’t brought about by
Facebook, as many have claimed, she said, but rather the less visible
building up of analyses among popular leaders and intellectuals, the
forming of organizations and setting of agendas in more traditional ways
among discontented people in North African nations.  We have known about
the US military’s torture in war since the Abu Ghraib photos were posted
online nearly 10 years ago, she said, but there is no evidence torture
has in any way stopped or lessened.  Wikileaks’ massive online
disclosures of top security documents have produced no changes in
government policies, she said.  All of these examples illustrate
people’s participation in democratic communication, of course, but they
do not reduce real problems which caused them in the first place nor do
they lead to more equality and fairness.  What is needed to produce such
structural changes, she said, is a vision of communism, something she
sets forth in depth in her most recent book, the *Communist Horizon*
(Verso, 2012).

I was provoked by these speakers, whose ideas were fresh and
consciousness-expanding, but my feminist sensibilities also found me
frustrated.  Broad macro-level analyses matter, but I believe their
abstract landscapes need to be populated by real people at some point. 
There is an assumption among many Leftists that offering a class
analysis is enough because class relations represent the central problem
we are meant to grapple with.  In truth political and economic equality
fall along the fault lines of gender and race.

To take John Bellamy Foster’s reference to the “cheapening of labor”,
for instance, requires a recognition that women’s labor is compensated
at lower rates than men’s all over the world.  Women are not only poorer
than men but they also work the “double-day” of domestic chores in
addition to work outside the home (a point also missed by Marx).  Jodi
Dean’s omission of women from her critique was perhaps the most
surprising since her work has incorporated feminist analyses.  While I
am in complete agreement with her on most of her points, I would have
liked some recognition from her that digital technology (for all of its
commercialized realities) has allowed women the means to mobilize
small-scale campaigns that have produced real outcomes that mattered to
us women.

It was, for example, feminists (particularly feminists of color) who
used Facebook and other social networking to mobilize public opinion
against Don Imus’s racist and sexist comments about the University of
Connecticut women basketball players a couple of years ago that got him
fired from radio.  In addition, African American leaders generated a
campaign against the news media a few years ago for failing to report on
missing Black women like LaToyia Figueroa (as they do on missing White
women like Natalee Holloway).  Figueroa’s case then emerged in the news,
prompting police investigations and an arrest.  As someone who studies
political (and other) communication, I believe these smaller-scale
events can be instructive as to the potential value of new technologies
in political formation.  Popular movements among marginalized peoples
begin on the margins and may build over time, with structural change
coming later.  In addition, social networks are still relatively new and
their cumulative impacts in the broader social structure cannot really
be assessed for some time to come.  My call for Foster and Dean’s
greater attention to gender dimensions in capitalism does not obviate
the need for class analysis.  With specific regard to the ownership of
social networking sites by the oligarchs who also control the broader
political economy, I am one democratic socialist who would like to see
DSA take a more active role in addressing communication structures and
policies that enable them to exist as monopolies.

UPDATE July 24… [*video of plenary sessions of this
conference*](http://www.iamcr.org/congress/dublin2013/1062-iamcr2013-videos)
are now available.

[GOOD READS! — The 1963 March and other items deserving of
attention](http://dsadc.org/socialist-takeaways-bastille-day-march-anniversary-dsa-convention-socialist-support/)

Sunday, July 14th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist*&lt;&gt;Midsummer 2013**

 Good Reads! These are articles, some obscure and some not so, that you
might have missed…

EPI’s newsletter analyzes the unfinished business of the 1963 March:
<http://www.epi.org/publication/unfinished-march-overview/>

William P. Jones in DISSENT discusses the labor- and jobs-focused
aspects of the 1963 march

<http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/the-forgotten-radical-history-of-the-march-on-washington>

\[note: on July 14 the *Dissent* website appeared to be unavailable.
Updates on this will follow\]

Member Kurt Stand notes a review of Jone’s book on the March, by Moshe
Marvits: “Jones thoroughly recovers the radical reality of the events
leading up to the march, as well as the march itself, and exposes the
important question of how such a radical event was so quickly remembered
as a model of moderation. “ via Portside, originally appeared in
*Washington Monthly*
<http://portside.org/2013-07-11/what-dr-king-didnt-say-misremembering-march-washington#sthash.zjdteZ2Y.dpuf>

Another March-related piece from the invaluable site “Portside,” a
response by Mark S. Mishler to the recent Supreme Court decision gutting
a crucial element of the Voting Rights Act: “The Court’s decision in
Shelby represents, perhaps, the last dying gasp of a white power
structure determined to block progress by any means necessary.”
<http://portside.org/2013-07-11/ruth-bader-ginsburg-john-lewis-jimmie-lee-jackson-fannie-lou-hamer-rosa-parks-coretta>

Talking Union reposts a netroots piece on alt-labor, like our DC-ROC…

<http://talkingunion.wordpress.com/2013/06/22/netroots-nation-why-alt-labor-is-important/>

About what we’re all learning to call alt-labor:

<http://inthesetimes.com/working/entry/15198/joe_burns_on_fast_food_strikes/>

About the automation of labor crisis; one from Gavin Mueller in Jacobin:
<http://jacobinmag.com/2013/04/the-rise-of-the-machines/>

And a surprisingly valuable take, with reference to some very
interesting studies, by Jim Tankersley in the WaPo:
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/have-the-robots-come-for-the-middle-class/2013/07/12/bac3b3c8-eaef-11e2-a301-ea5a8116d211_story.html>

Still another consideration of Gar Alperovitz’s localist radicalism by
Matt Bruenig in the excellent Demos blogsite:
<http://www.demos.org/blog/making-equality-local>

Some of us have had experience with the International Socialist
Organization (ISO); others not so much. Here is an interesting take by a
longtime member, now ex-member, from The North Star. BTW this was posted
by national DSA’s Facebook page; that page is showing more and more
productive activity and may be worth a “like” if you are a political
Facebook user… <http://www.thenorthstar.info/?p=9055>

An edition of the journal *The Good Society* on the theme “Alternatives
to Capitalism” with a lead article co-authored by Gar Alperovitz and a
colleague from the Democracy Collaborative, called [The Possibility of a
Pluralist Commonwealth and a Community-Sustaining
Economy](http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0001) The
journal is open access:
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.issue-1>

Ross Templeton sends this hopeful Canadian podcast:
<http://www.cbc.ca/thesundayedition/shows/2013/02/24/is-marxism-facing-a-rebirth/>

[Neoliberal Austerity – European
Style](http://dsadc.org/neoliberal-austerity-european-style/)

Sunday, July 14th, 2013

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Midsummer 2013**

*By Kurt Stand*

            “… the rulers of the transcontinental corporations … are the
new feudal lords, answerable to neither national governments nor the
United Nations.  The World Trade Organization, the European Union and
the International Monetary Fund are sufficient for them; these are the
principal instruments of their strategy.  \[National\] governments are
still needed, as in the past, to maintain rights, but in the framework
of globalization, sovereign authority melts like snow in the sun.” –
*Jean Zeigler, Special Advisor to the United Nations for Human Rights.*

“The creation of the Euro has functioned, from the outset, as a
neo-liberal vehicle.  From the Mastricht Treaty \[which created the
European Union (EU)\] to the current fiscal packages, all agreements
behind the common currency have obligated governments to enforce the
ever more brutal policies that today we call austerity.  … With the
economic crisis each new pact has forced cabinets to take measures the
exact opposite of what has been needed.  Therefore the crisis has led to
a severe recession. The Europe of the Euro is politically, socially and
culturally a failure.”—*Giorgio Cremaschi, former president of the
Italian metal workers union, FIOM-CGIL.*

Introduced in 1999, the Euro is now the currency of 17 countries. 
Despite the promises of many advocates, it has not led to a more just or
peaceful continent.    Yet many critics of neoliberalism in the US look
toward Europe as providing a more humane model of capitalism than our
own – a reversal of a past in which many in Europe looked to the US.  It
is worth recalling that in the quarter century after World War II, the
United States economy seemed to show a path through which the capitalist
system could meet the needs of the majority of the working population. 
Fueled by the enormous wealth accumulated and productive capacity
generated while other nations were being devastated by combat, the
social contract developed in the late 1940’s was built around economic
growth.  Strong unions negotiated pension and health benefits with large
corporations, providing a model non-union firms felt compelled to
emulate.  A heterogeneous federal/state/municipal system emerged in
which public infrastructure spending — financed by high taxation on the
wealthy – constituted a de facto jobs program.

The continued existence of various New Deal programs to help the needy,
the increase of agricultural subsidies to keep food prices low, and the
expansion of public universities enabled many workers to build a
middle-class lifestyle for themselves or their children, and provide a
safety net for those without work during cyclical downturns.   Racial,
gender and other forms of discrimination remained legal and systemic,
wide circles of the population were still condemned to lives of poverty,
speed-up and harsh factory conditions were on-going sources of conflict;
the whole system depended on war and environmental destruction. 
Nonetheless working-class standards of living were higher than ever
before in history.  The possibility of class mobility and continued
prospects for social reform within the existing framework provided an
argument that progress for working people was possible well short of
socialism, well short of the universal social programs that
characterized western European social democracy or the social market
policies of their conservative Christian counterparts.

Another quarter century and a different picture appeared.  In looking at
the consequences of neoliberal economics and politics that have
dominated social policy under both Republican and Democratic
administrations the European model is attractive.  Many EU countries
provide a stronger safety net, greater social equality and social
mobility than we do, along with greater access to food security and
better – universal – health care.  Mandated paid vacations, paid
maternity or paternity leave stand in direct contrast to the countless
exclusions from our unpaid family leave law and points to one of the
many gaps between the two sides of the North Atlantic.  Unions in Europe
remain stronger than in the US, as do social democratic and other
labor-based, alternative and left-wing parties.   And the multi-class
celebrations in most European nations of Obama’s victory over Bush in
2008 reflected a clear preference for diplomacy over a “war at any
price” foreign policy, just as the more inclusive European Union spoke
to the acceptance of social policies completely absent in NAFTA.

Yet all that glitters is not gold.  Just as the US system in the 1950s
had lacks and vulnerabilities that led to its demise, so too current
austerity measures reveal cracks and fissures in a Europe in which
neoliberal corporate imperatives dictate public policy.   Examples are
easy to find.  Portugal, for example, is facing bankruptcy, its economy
having shrunk over 2% after a decade of stagnation.  Unemployment now
stands at 17.5%, while for youth the jobless rate is nearly 39%.  Those
figures are comparable to Italy’s larger economy (which also shrank in
2012) and much worse in Greece and Spain, each with more than a quarter
of their respective workforces without work – and each with a youth
unemployment rate of over 55%.   Overall in the European Union, 12% are
without work – and with such numbers come budget cuts.  Everywhere
education spending, mass transit and infrastructure repair, social
welfare and pensions are being reduced, while new health care fees and
exclusions are being introduced.  Moreover, shifting corporate
investment has undermined numerous industries and intensified a
decades-long process of union membership loss.  Many social democratic,
green and other left parties have – like the Democratic Party – trimmed
their sails, prioritizing market satisfaction over social needs and
losing strength in the process.  Racial tensions – more accurately,
 racism— are also on the rise due to mounting insecurity and job
competition.  Capital can move everywhere in Europe with equal rights,
whereas labor moves without equal rights or wages.  Immigrants arriving
from non-EU African or Middle-Eastern countries live life in a shadow
world of shadow jobs with omnipresent police shadowing them.

And everywhere parliaments are finding their powers cut; the so-called
“troika” – the European Union, European Central Bank and the
International Monetary Fund – is able to override elected governments
and force cutbacks in social spending and social services based on
powers granted by a European Constitution ratified with little popular
input or approval.   Greece and Italy have both been forced to bow to
the dictates of unelected bankers in order to receive any outside aid or
investment.

Even more powerful nations suffer.  Unemployment in France has reached a
record high of 3.2 million, 10.8% of the workforce.  On May 5, more than
100,000 marched in a protest called by the Left Front.  Led by former
Socialist leader Jean-Luc Melanchon, demonstrators demanded that
Socialist President Francoise Hollande stay true to his election
promises, instead of pursuing austerity and “labor-flexibility” in order
to comply with EU rules.  Budgetary pressures at home that hurt workers,
students and pensioners has not, however, meant military cutbacks. 
France’s imperial dispatch of troops to Mali is one of many armed
actions in its former colonial empire.  Spain too, despite an economy in
freefall, had the money to join NATO’s imperial adventure in Mali.

With unemployment at “only” 5.8%, Germany is supposedly the exception to
the rule.   But Europe’s woes don’t stop at any particular border. 
 April saw 300 BMW jobs go east from a factory in Leipzig to one in the
Czech Republic.  In consequence, a nearby factory – dependent on BMW –
with 170 employees will shut down completely.  The union and works
council, seeing little hope, offered little resistance.  More labor
resistance was offered in Bavaria, but with the same result; an auto
plant closed shop to set up production further east.  These instances
can be multiplied many times over as tens of thousands of jobs are
shifted from western to eastern Europe.

Nonetheless, Germany, with a trade surplus, not a deficit, seems to have
escaped the worst aspects of the crisis.  Although German labor claims
the government undercounts the jobless, no one will deny that its
employment picture is far better than in most other European countries. 
In fact, the German economy’s growth at a time when other countries are
contracting has given it increased strength within the EU – strength
enough to demand austerity abroad that is not fully practiced at home. 
But beneath the surface, all is not well – poverty is increasing within
Germany, exacerbating a growing inequality.  This has been made worse by
cuts in the powerful social security network that underwrote the
nation’s economic growth in previous decades – witness an increase in
the retirement age, in university fees, in “exceptions” to universal
social welfare provisions.  Employment levels have been maintained only
by increasing the amount of part-time and sub-contracted work.  The
resulting drop in full-time employment has been matched by a decrease in
union membership in absolute terms as well as a percentage of the
workforce.  A growing number of strikes reflect the harsher new climate.

As in the US, this doesn’t make economic “sense” – but only if the
economy is judged from what will benefit the majority of the population,
rather than a small number at the top of society.  As an editorial in
*Neues Deutschland* (a newspaper close to the German Left Party)
explained:  “The current miserable situation and bad outlook are only to
a small degree due to financial policies.  Much more responsible is the
austerity imposed on failing economies by German leadership.  It is not
only anti-social as it sinks a broad part of the population into deep
poverty.  It will also throttle economic recovery of the countries that
remain still in a recession.”   Force is required to put such a program
in place – not only the force of economic power but also the force
exercised through increased domestic police budgets, increased
repression of immigrants and the force of war.  Germany, the world’s
third largest arms exporter, also sent troops to Mali, sent soldiers to
Afghanistan and takes part in other armed “peace-keeping” missions in
subject parts of the globe.

To note all the above is not to pretend that the destruction of social
insurance or the level of militarism in Germany or Europe as a whole has
reached the levels found in the US.   In organizing for health care
benefits and pension rights, for humane welfare policies or meaningful
leave policies, the more advanced measures in place in many European
countries should be cited as a reminder that policies deemed impossible
here are, in fact, very possible indeed.   At the same time, we need to
keep in mind that capitalism in Europe cannot, any more than in the US
during the 1950s, hold the solution to our social decline.  Austerity,
neo-liberal corporatism, is not simply the result of particularly
malevolent Republican politicians, or particularly opportunist
Democratic ones; rather, it is the systemic direction of corporate
capitalism today.   In neither the US nor Europe can there be genuine
freedom without a broad participatory democracy and that there is no
democracy without genuine equality – and without peace.

That is the direction proposed by Sahra Wagenknecht, the German Left
Party’s deputy chair and parliamentary speaker on economic affairs.  She
has proposed alternatives to neo-liberal Europe’s austerity that include
a European-wide capital tax, direct financing of national budgets
through a publicly controlled European central bank, the right of
individual nations to regulate their own currencies (not now possible in
Euro countries) and programs to foster real wage increases, higher
pensions, and improved social services – proposals aimed at overcoming
existing disparities between and within countries.  Beyond that, she has
put forth more fundamental goals:

 “If the 500 largest European business concerns were broken up and their
production and sales facilities, their buildings and infrastructure
given over to each country where located, then Europe would have a new
vision, within and without.  Then finally changes would be possible that
fail today because of the resistance of the core lobby of capital:  A
European unity that stands for unified living conditions and not for a
unity utilized to optimize corporate profits.  A European tax union that
reforms national tax systems in order to strengthen social equality
instead of intensifying inequality.  A European foreign and security
policy that is not developed to prepare for imperial war, but rather
sees itself as responsible for disarmament, \[global\] parity and
development.  A European constitution that is more than … a lever for
disempowerment.  A European social union that is fixed on high living
standards and binding social rights for all …  Then finally, not only in
proclamations and Sunday speeches, but rather in reality, we could
change the old armed and war-ridden continent into a new, social and
peaceful continent, valuing friendship, life and love.”

**Note**: *Neo-liberalism* as used here is the economic theory that
upholds the primacy of property rights, free markets and free trade and
is characterized by deregulation, privatization and withdrawal of the
state from public provision.  It stands in opposition to Keynesian full
employment and social welfare programs.  It was first implemented by the
Pinochet dictatorship in Chile, then by Margaret Thatcher’s Conservative
government in Britain and Ronald Reagan’s Republican Administration in
the US.  Since the 1980s neoliberalism has dominated both Republican and
Democratic public policy.  President Obama’s stimulus was an example of
traditional Keynesian liberalism, his bank bailout an example of
neoliberal conservatism.

 

Quotes:

(All translations are my own)

Jean Zeigler, *L’Empire de la honte*, (The Empire of Shame), 2005

Giorgio Cremaschi, interview, “Euro-Europa ist gescheitert,” (“The Euro
and Europe is a Failure”) *Junge Welt*, May 7, 2013

“Simon Poelchau, “Hamsterad” (“Hamster  Wheel”) *Neues Deutschland,* May
4-5, 2013

Sahra Wagenknecht, *Kapitalismus im Koma, Eine sozialistische Diagnose*
(*Capitalism in a Coma, a Socialist Diagnosis*), 2009

 

Other Sources:

Daniel Behruzi, “Der Osten ruft,” (“The East Calls”) *Junge Welt*, April
2, 2013).

Jw-Bericht, “’Tragodie’ in Euro-Land” (“Tragedy in Euro-Land)” *Junge
Welt*, April 3, 2013)

Peter Steiniger, “Therapie schlagt nicht an” (“Therapy not Working”)
*Junge Welt*, May 3, 2013

Keine ‘normale’ Krise by Rainer Rupp – *Junge Welt* May 4-5, 2013

(Euro-Kritik von links) (Euro-Critic from the Left) by Sahra
Wagenknecht, *Junge Welt*, May 7, 2013.

Ralf Klingieck, “Grosses Auskehren unsozialer Politik,” (“Sweep Away
Unsocial Policies”) *Neues Deutschland*, May 4-5, 2013

 

[SOCIALIST TAKEAWAYS: Bastille Day, the anniversary march, DSA
convention, local
support](http://dsadc.org/socialist-takeaways-bastille-day-the-anniversary-march-dsa-convention-local-support/)

**Bastille Day’s Lessons for Socialists**

*By Bill Mosley*

As national holidays go, Bastille Day – the July 14 celebration of all
things France – may seem to us Americans as lacking in substance. 
Unlike our own Independence Day, the date the United States came into
being, Bastille Day marks nothing nearly as momentous as a new country
being born.  Rather, the French holiday marks the 1789 storming of a
notorious Paris prison and the freeing of seven – yes, seven –
prisoners.  It would be four years before the guillotine claimed Louis
XVI and the First French Republic would rise on the ashes of monarchy.

Even the ouster of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette didn’t exactly usher
in a happily-ever-after era of *liberté, egalité, fraternité*.  Within a
decade of Louis’ demise, republicanism had given way to Bonapartist
empire.  Then came more kings, another brief era of republicanism, and
one more fling with Bonapartism before representative government settled
in for good – eight decades after the fall of the Bastille.  France’s
road from monarchy to democracy was very much a two-steps-forward,
one-step-back, one-step-sideways journey.

We think of America’s struggle against monarchy as a much cleaner
affair.  England’s American colonists awakened on July 4, 1776 as
subjects of King George III and went to sleep as citizens of a new
democracy, endowed with the rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.  Right?

Well, not really.  The promises of the Declaration of Independence were
not fulfilled overnight – and some remain unfulfilled today.  Thomas
Jefferson’s famous dictum that “all men are created equal” rang hollow
when hundreds of thousands of African Americans were enslaved, including
several hundred held by Jefferson himself.  The word “men” was
well-chosen; equal rights for women were not on the Framers’ agenda. 
And not only slaves were deemed less than “equal:” free nonwhites as
well as white men who did not own property were largely excluded from
the franchise in our early days.

It took a struggle of nearly two centuries – through abolition of
slavery, winning of women’s suffrage and elimination of legal Jim Crow –
before the United States could be truly said to enfranchise all of its
citizens (except, of course, colonial subjects such as those in the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico).  But even with the right to vote,
the promised “pursuit of happiness” proved out of reach for many absent
another set of rights – economic rights.

The notion that humans have a right to resources sufficient to ensure a
decent quality of life is a relatively new one.  This idea began to take
shape during the labor struggles of the 19^th^ century and was given
greater voice by the growing socialist movement, which saw itself as the
political expression of workplace struggles.  For many decades,
socialists were at the forefront in championing such then-radical
notions as universal healthcare, a minimum wage, old-age pensions and
other economic rights.  With Franklin Roosevelt’s inclusion of “freedom
from want” as part of his Four Freedoms, a central tenet of socialism
had entered the mainstream political debate. However, the continuing
dominance of corporate priorities prevented true “freedom from want”
from becoming anything but a distant dream.

Of course, the struggle for economic rights is only part of the
continuing battle for full equality under our Constitution.  Immigrants
who come to the United States seeking a better life continue to be
scapegoated and driven to the shadows.  The recent revelations about the
extent of the government’s surveillance of ordinary Americans show that
the Fourth Amendment – our protection against unreasonable government
searches and seizures – has been rendered toothless.  True gender
equality remains a work in progress.  The Supreme Court’s recent gutting
of the Voting Rights Act will make it harder to prevent racial
discrimination at the polls.  On the other hand, with the Court’s
striking down of the discriminatory Defense of Marriage Act, equality
for gay and lesbian Americans has taken a giant step forward, if not
necessarily over the finish line.

So what does Bastille Day have to do with American socialists?  In
celebrating the fall of the Bastille, the French celebrate not the end
of a struggle, but its beginning.  July 14, 1789 can be said to mark the
date the common people of France began to take responsibility for their
destiny.  Yet a long struggle lay ahead before the promises of *liberté,
egalité,* and *fraternité* truly began to be realized.  Likewise,
socialists – in the United States and across the world – are facing a
struggle for economic justice that is really just beginning.

So let’s join our French brethren on July 14 in a chorus of “La
Marseillaise” with the understanding that the greatest part of our
battle lies ahead, not behind.

 

***Join DSA for the 50^th^ Anniversary of the March on Washington***. 
Join local and national DSA members for the 50^th^ anniversary
commemoration of the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.  The
commemorative march is expected to take place Saturday, August 24 on the
Mall.  While the 1963 march is today largely associated with Martin
Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech, the event was as much an
appeal for economic equality and justice and it was for civil rights, as
articles in this issue of the *Washington Socialist* and in the current
edition of DSA’s magazine [Democratic
Left](http://www.dsausa.org/democratic_left) point out.  Check out
[Metro DC DSA’s Meetup
site](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/calendar/) for more details as
the event draws near. There’ll be a **National Organizing Conference
Call scheduled for Tuesday, July 23rd** at 9pm Eastern, 8pm Central, 7pm
Mountain, 6pm Pacific.

Get on the call to hear what you can do locally to bring the message of
the radical March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom home, and what DSA
is doing in Washington DC on the anniversary of the original march, this
August.\
**To RSVP and for CALL-IN INFORMATION:**
[**http://www.dsausa.org/50th\_anniversary\_project\_call**](http://www.dsausa.org/50th_anniversary_project_call)

***DSA National Convention to be held Oct. 25-27 in Oakland, Calif**.*

– Democratic Socialists of America’s biennial national convention – the
gathering that sets the organization’s priorities for the coming two
years – will be held Oct. 25-27 in Oakland, Calif.

In addition to decision-making sessions, the convention will feature
discussions of democratic socialist perspectives on the issues of the
day, talks by prominent DSA members and workshops on how to be a more
effective activist.  Confirmed speakers for the convention include John
Nichols, Jose La Luz and David Bacon.

Metro-DC DSA will send a delegation to the convention.  National DSA
will provide delegates with a partial reimbursement of their travel
costs, and the local chapter also will offer additional financial
assistance so that cost doesn’t prevent anyone from attending.  Local
members who are interested in serving as delegates should contact Jose
Gutierrez at <jagfeb2002@yahoo.com>.  – Bill Mosley

***Put your money where your mouth is — Support Metro-DC DSA***.

If you are a member of Democratic Socialists of America in the greater
Washington area you’ve probably already received our letter or e-mail
asking for financial support for Metro-DC DSA.   Those who responded
have earned our deepest gratitude.  For those who have not, there’s no
time like the present.  We receive no funding from National DSA and rely
on our local members to help us carry out our work of injecting
socialist ideas and ideals into the local political discussion.

So don’t hesitate – become a full-fledged member of Metro-DC DSA by
paying your local dues today!  We also offer some attractive socialist
gifts for local dues-payers.  For a minimum contribution of \$15 we
offer the DSA red sticker reading “Change Comes from the People, Not the
Politicians.”  Those joining at the \$75 sustaining level or above have
a choice of either the 1981 edition of *The Other America* with a new
introduction by Michael Harrington; or the rare original program from
the 1988 “Tribute to Michael Harrington” in New York containing articles
on Mike’s life and work by Irving Howe, Eleanor Holmes Norton, Todd
Gitlin, Harold Meyerson, William Julius Wilson and others.  Make your
check out to Greater Washington DC DSA and send it to 1742 Hobart St.
NW, Washington, DC 20009.

Remember:  it takes socialist cash to defeat capitalist trash!

– *Bill Mosley*

 

[The Unfinished Business of 1963 Requires Some New, Alt-political Skills
on the
Left](http://dsadc.org/the-unfinished-business-of-1963-requires-some-new-alt-political-skills-on-the-left/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Midsummer 2013**

*By Woody Woodruff*

In 1963, amid the overflow of soaring rhetoric at the original March on
Washington for Jobs and Freedom, then-SNCC organizer John Lewis tersely
asked “Where is the political party that will make it unnecessary to
march on Washington?” The response has been a long, empty echo.

Fifty years later, the recognition that the 1963 march still has
unfinished business is widespread. Progressive partners at the [Economic
Policy
Institute](http://www.epi.org/publication/unfinished-march-overview/),
[The
Nation](http://www.thenation.com/blog/175022/week-poverty-unfinished-march-washington-jobs-and-freedom#axzz2XqNvRFBa)
and other think tanks and analytical media are anatomizing the sorry
state of the jobs and freedom landscape. The half-century anniversary of
the 1963 march appears to be generating a big-time *hommage* event, and
progressives are working to be sure it is more than a re-enactment.
Startlingly, the changing distribution of power in the last half-century
has put working people, the poor and their progressive allies in some
ways farther behind the curve now than then. And racial inequality
persists in meaningful ways: housing, education, employment.

Democratic socialists’ structural linkage of racial inequality to
parallel inequalities of social and economic class and their roots in
unchecked corporate hegenomy have made, and will make, our take on these
matters awkward for our alliances. The unfinished business of the 1963
march is, in part, a result of that signal event’s focus on the far
starker inequalities of the day.  But as the EPI report observes,
organizers A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin saw some of those
linkages very well: “\[Randolph and Rustin\] understood that improving
the socioeconomic position of African Americans required an end to both
race- and class-based injustices in America.” Still, the observation
this year of the anniversary of that foundational gathering can skew the
view of today’s conditions.

It is worth discussing whether  the lessons learned in the intervening
half-century are applicable to today’s conditions. As socialists, we
have always looked skeptically at solutions based in party politics.
Even so, perhaps not skeptically enough. The political system
indisputably has failed to address many issues of the 1963 March’s
platform. Such allies as we have in today’s formal electoral politics
are embattled and isolated in ways that would have seemed
near-impossible in 1963. Despite the undeniable advances on some fronts
since then, many gates to a good society, let alone “Great,” are closed,
or guarded by the minions of corporate hegemony.

EPI’s anatomy of the shortfalls since 1963’s hope and promise is a good
starting point. But a socialist take, acknowledging the failure of
electoral political strategy, looks deeper.  EPI economist Algernon
Austin identifies:

**Housing**: Neighborhoods remain segregated by race and resources;
“today, nearly half of poor black children live in neighborhoods with
concentrated poverty; however, only a little more than a tenth of poor
white children live in similar neighborhoods.” We socialists would add
that housing for the many has been degraded or denied by a corporate and
policy focus on housing as fungible wealth, seldom matched to or
responsive to community or family needs, profligate by its sprawling
nature with energy and other resources, blatantly designed to separate
social and economic classes on the bogus claim of personal security, and
deliberately made vulnerable to bubble finance by corporate fiat.
Regulation of this vital resource is distributed over power centers at
federal, state and local levels – and hardly by accident — that work at
cross-purposes and are easily corrupted by the major money involved.

**Education**: Austin observes that “In the late 1960s, 76.6 percent of
black children attended majority black schools. In 2010, 74.1 percent of
black children attended majority nonwhite schools.”  As he notes,
inequality of community resources condemns most of those schools to a
kind of subsistence learning. Socialists link the impoverishment of
communities (see housing, above) and their schools at the deepest level.
Education’s continued inequality and failure reflects, at the K-12
level, the debased, segregated housing stock that serves as its
tax/resource base; higher education is crippled by the corporate free
ride now in place in most states’ fiscal policies, ratcheting up public
university tuition as tax resources flag. Within the education sphere, a
well-funded bright line identifies the path of ruling class reproduction
through private, branded institutions priced out of the reach of most. A
reasonable, detached perspective on the arcane and tradition-bound
sphere of education, skills development and personal growth would
recommend not tinkering but wholesale replacement of the features and
conditions of this essential public activity.

**Work:** Austin notes that the disparity in unemployment between black
and white workers remains roughly double in the Lesser Depression, as in
1963, though it improved considerable in boom times in the interval. He
notes that the UAW’s Walter Reuther spoke at the 1963 march, and
“Reuther and other march organizers believed that the United States had
the wealth to provide a job to everyone who wanted to work, but lacked
sufficient political will to do so. They launched the march in part to
build that political will. It is shocking how relevant their complaint
is today.”

As socialists, we concur with that halcyon view. But we lament that the
terms of employment are far more firmly in the hands of corporate power
today than they were in 1963, despite the fair-employment legislation
that has intervened. The ruinous long-range effects of Taft-Hartley were
only beginning to be felt then, and union strength stood at around 29-30
percent of the total workforce, compared to today’s 12 percent. Worker
control over their conditions of employment are checkmated by corporate
power. Corporate frames constrain the options of workers and limit their
freedom to be compensated for their actual skills. The frames extend, as
the EPI overview separately observes, to a management grip on
compensation anchored by the appallingly low, certainly non-“living”,
minimum wage.  No political activity, even in the Great Society years,
has come close to penetrating the armor of economic control that drives
all those factors and appears to have nearly peaked in the present era.

The sphere of labor and consumption, an area where US working families
need to, and should, exercise collective political will, is instead
wholly owned by the corporate hegemons, and administered to their
benefit with the collusion of the failed, co-opted political system.

This, a reader might justly say, is an unpleasant and perhaps
exaggerated view of the current situation, the unfinished business of
the march. It emphasizes, purposely, what I see as the democratic
socialist view of the interlocking coercive factors that tie down both
US working families and the broader society in which they increasingly
are becoming the helots. The web is more securely woven than ever, and
the US political system is co-opted into it just as securely.  Rough and
scary as the racial conflict of 1963 was, progressive forces across the
board carried more weight.

Many DSA members are lucky enough to have knowledge-work kinds of jobs
that provide a little more reward, a little more agency and autonomy.
But we recognize we are equally locked into a wage-and-hour system that
organizes almost fetishistically the total routines of our lives. A job
is full-time, or part-time, or even more contingent than that, and often
provided or withheld at will by the employer. There is in effect no
appeal from that system for individual workers, and less and less
respite via the unions, increasingly shackled by labor regulations that
tip more and more toward management with every slight, opportunistic
shift.

The fruits of innovation are not applied to redesign of work in society
but to the amplification of hegemonic control. As A. Philip Randolph
said with his usual startling prescience at the 1963 March, “Yes, we
want a Fair Employment Practice Act, but what good will it do if
profit-geared automation destroys the jobs of millions of workers black
and white?”

Part of our work as democratic socialists, we feel, is to keep the
totalist nature of this system visible to, under the noses of, the folk
being ground down by it. They must be our allies, or we fail. We know
that this complex of constraints is designed to be “normalized,” to make
itself invisible behind the curtain of the everyday. And we know our
other duty is to mobilize – in part through that educational, that
communicative work – the people under the system’s thumb to shake that
off and seek to break up the complex of constraints that blights all of
our lives.

The appeal of 1963 was to the political system – so much so, we
remember, that the young John Lewis’s acerbic attacks on the Kennedy
Administration’s lackadaisical response to injustice were trimmed out by
the “cooler heads” in charge of the march. But Lewis’s question – where
are the politics that will address the injustices of our everyday lives?
– is perhaps more unanswered now than it was in 1963. The role of DSA
and other organizations and allies on the progressive left is to
recognize how limited the political remedies have become as
financialization of the 2013 economy has drained the balance from the
manufacturing economy in place in 1963, when the head of the UAW was
still a national figure. Corporate hegemony is no airy phrase of theory
but a representation of today’s systemic ruling-class grip on nearly
every facet of most lives.  Undoing it will require alt-politics to
match our alt-labor formations and our Occupy strategies.

The regional, bottom-up strategies emerging from [work by Richard Wolff
and Gar Alperovitz](http://www.demos.org/blog/making-equality-local),
among many others, probably offer more return on expenditure of our
current resources than pushing at the diminishing part of the electoral
sector that has the will or power to effect change. Locating those
pressure points – where workers and communities still have the option
under law to recover and exercise power in the workplace and in their
everyday lives – is not necessarily at the top of our skill set. But it
seems to me that we need to get good at that.

The mobilizing energy of attempts to re-take control of work lives
appears more and more a critical piece of the puzzle, a shaking up of
local and regional encrustations of power and control that will come to
lead the political formations of those regions by the nose.  Other
alt-methods will be required. Some of them may engender alt-politicians
that have the impact on the left that we have seen on the right. There
is still room for such anomalies, and DSA and its allies must foster
them. But we must not count on them to accomplish our work, at least not
by themselves. Continuing to pull the shrouds off the moving parts of
hegemony for all to see, and pushing to encourage and fashion new,
popular alternatives to replace them is more necessary than ever. Where
the March on Washington pulled the cover off the severest inequalities
of race – to much good effect – the effort in 2013 and beyond has to
unmask the mechanics of structural class inequalities and show how our
society can be different.

**The EPI report:**
[**http://www.epi.org/publication/unfinished-march-overview/**](http://www.epi.org/publication/unfinished-march-overview/)

**EPI co-sponsors a symposium, “Unfinished March,” July 22 at the
AFL-CIO headquarters:**
[**http://www.epi.org/event/unfinished-march-symposium/**](http://www.epi.org/event/unfinished-march-symposium/)

**Links to more articles about the 1963 March and its resonances today
are in the** [**Good Reads
compilation**](http://dsadc.org/socialist-takeaways-bastille-day-march-anniversary-dsa-convention-socialist-support/)
**in this issue.**
