***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from October 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*The October 2015 Issue of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/the-october-2015-issue-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Friday, October 2nd, 2015

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the October 2015 issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
monthly email newsletter of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America**.

October encompasses more work for We Need Bernie, DSA’s
independent-expenditure work for Sen. Bernie Sanders’s presidential
primary campaign. Our other concerns as socialists continue in parallel
and are reflected in the articles this month – social justice,
inequality and the critical interplay of economic justice and race, from
street level to the football stadium box seats to the marginalized and
disenfranchised people of Puerto Rico.

**On the calendar this month:**\
***Date change due to weather: *** the ***Socialist Book Discussion
Group*** now meets **Saturday, Oct. 10**,  3 p.m. at the Kogod Courtyard
(at the Smithsonian American Art Museum and National Portrait Gallery)
8th and F Streets, Washington, DC (map). Gallery Place/Chinatown is best
Metrorail access. Split Session – Discussion of two books in this
session 1.  Concluding discussion of Steve Fraser, ***The Age of
Acquiescence:  The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized
Wealth and Power*.** 2.  Introductory Discussion and/or Full Discussion
of Ian Haney Lopez, ***Dog Whistle Politics:  How Coded Racial Appeals
Have Reinvented Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class.\
***\
***Sunday, Oct 11 Metro DC DSA General Membership Meeting,*** 2 p.m. at
Martin Luther King Jr. Main Library, 901 G. St. NW. Preceded by a
steering committee meeting at 12:30. Gallery Place is also the best
Metrorail access.

***Oct. 15*** ***Jobs with Justice annual “I’ll be There” event***,
roast of CLC leader Jos Williams on occasion of JwJ’s 15th anniversary.
6 p.m.,  All Souls Unitarian Church, 1500 Harvard St. NW. Info [*here\
*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=101cb0b65e&e=003de9ccab)\
***Oct. 22 – “We Need Bernie” forum and rally featuring Jim
Hightower***, see article below.

**Thursday, Oct. 29 DATE CHANGE** — **Socialist Salon**, 6:30 p.m. at
Hunan Dynasty, 215 Penna. Ave. SE. **“Saving the US Postal Service from
the Privatizers,”** A Presentation by Debby Szeredy, Executive VP Of the
American Postal Workers Union  (APWU). Best access from Capitol South
Metrorail station.

**IN THIS ISSUE:**\
Jim Hightower, progressive humorist extraordinaire, headlines a forum
and rally for DSA’s “We Need Bernie” independent activity Oct. 22.
Merrill Miller previews the event and Metro DC DSA’s activity on behalf
of the candidate. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=5fa24c6407&e=003de9ccab)

The knotty problem of democratic socialists’ focus on economic
inequality and the more complex view of injustice embraced by activists
of color is examined by two writers. Kurt Stand has an overview of the
current picture particularly as limned by black activists writing in
this terrain. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=b89464e8f9&e=003de9ccab)
Dan Adkins locates one of the pivotal points – history and how we
conveniently forget it in the throes of present-day activism. [*Read
complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=9186b6cc7f&e=003de9ccab)

An ongoing project to rectify the racist misnaming of the Washington
professional football team is described by Bill Mosley, with an account
of an upcoming event in the project. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=0dd74f13d5&e=003de9ccab)

Puerto Rico, encumbered by debt that US law and congressional meddling
has made nearly impossible to manage, has been called the “Greece of the
United States.” Metro DC DSA co-chair Jose Gutierrez, a native of Puerto
Rico, interviews Jose La Luz, one of the island’s labor leaders and a
national DSA co-chair, about the facts surrounding that comparison. We
reprise this from Jose’s article in the current *Democratic Left*.
[*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=051e1dd0f0&e=003de9ccab)

Tariq Ali’s book on the effect of the Reagan-Thatcher ideology on
subsequent “Third Way” neoliberal regimes under Blair and Bill Clinton
is reviewed by Dave Richardson. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c03d6c6309&e=003de9ccab)

Dan Adkins takes a look at a quirky scifi show on television, *Humans*,
and what it might say about human relationships to increasingly complex
near-sentient “persons.” [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=00368ec9f4&e=003de9ccab).

In “Good Reads for Socialists,” more on race and class, trade policy
macro and micro, government deployment of false narratives, and more.
[*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=a4a1cab09a&e=003de9ccab)

**You can read past articles in the *Washington Socialist* right here on
our website where they are archived. Just scroll down, or see “archives”
by month in the side panel.**

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*“Humans,” a TV Series with Hints About our Tech
Future*](http://dsadc.org/humans-a-tv-series-with-hints-about-our-tech-future/)

Wednesday, September 30th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2015**

** ***By Daniel C. Adkins*

** *“Humans”*** is a British-American sci-fi series that has run on the
AMC and Channel 4.  The first season of eight shows is over, but there
will be a second season in 2016.  The series *Humans* is unique in that
it occurs in a future where industrialized countries in the near future
have robot helpers called synths.  These synths, which look like humans,
interact by speech, do chores, and remind us to take our meds.  The plot
gets interesting when we learn that a genius computer scientist has made
a “family” of synths that are self-aware or sentient.  These conscious
synths are being hunted by a police agency for reasons that are not
clear.  What makes the synths interesting are that they can think, feel,
and grow mentally just like the rest of us.  The idea that robots would
have a personality based on their own social history adds a dimension to
the story.

Learning by socialization was a part of *Star Trek: the Next
Generation*’s Data character and is beginning to be part of the plot in
several new Sci Fi films, including *Her*.

The previous model for robots was that they were mass-produced and
identical.  However, as our Internet use becomes transcribed into
personal profiles of ourselves, and soon involves our dolls, the idea
that computers can learn from experience is becoming common.

The plot also focuses on a human family that ends up owning a synth,
which (who?) is self-aware.  Much of the plot revolves round the human
family and the sentient synth bonding with and learning from each other.

Although there is no direct democratic socialist content to this series
at the moment, how computers will impact our work and life in the near
future is probably on all our minds. Already there are films showing the
incompatibility of using self-aware robots as enslaved persons.  Many of
us will live long enough to see at least some of this tech be realized.

**Footnote on the future**:  In time for this Christmas, computer
scientists and AI specialists working for Mattel may have produced a new
doll, *Hello Barbie*.  This is sad news for socialist feminists as
Barbie has been shown to be bad for young girls’ physical self-image. 
The doll cannot but help but replicate some social values and which ones
will be telling.  The new doll has a Wi-Fi connection and a computer to
allow discussions with young girls.  The Wi-Fi connection builds and
saves a girl’s profile, which is used as the doll’s memory (corporate
resource anyone).  The new doll will have 8,000 lines of coded
conversation and is reported to be a good listener and will remember who
is in your family.

For more info see
[*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humans\_(TV\_series*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humans_%28TV_series))
and for fun read New York Times, Sept. 16, 2015, Barbie Wants to Get to
Know Your Child [*http://nyti.ms/1Mrxp11*](http://nyti.ms/1Mrxp11)

The future is closer than you think.

[*Bernie Sanders, Black Lives Matter, and Seizing the Moment- An
Overview and
Orientation*](http://dsadc.org/bernie-sanders-black-lives-matter-and-seizing-the-moment-an-overview-and-orientation/)

Wednesday, September 30th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2015**

 *By Kurt Stand*

** ** “I did not say anything.  I was always embarrassed by the words
sacred, glorious, and sacrifice and the expression in vain.  We had
heard them … and had read them … now for a long time, and I had seen
nothing sacred, and the things that were glorious had no glory and the
sacrifices were like the stockyards at Chicago if nothing was done with
the meat except to bury it. … Abstract words such as glory, honor,
courage, or hallow were obscene beside the concrete names of villages,
the number of roads, the names of rivers, the numbers of regiments and
the dates.” Ernest Hemingway, **A Farewell to Arms** (1929, Shocken
edition 1969 p. 185)

**Considerations**

As Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign continues to gather support, he
comes under ever sharper scrutiny – not only by Republican and
Democratic Party opponents, but by others who are themselves working to
address the social inequities that abound in our society.  Some such
criticism is itself destructive; the tendency to view every insufficient
step forward as a form of betrayal is a charge that every alternative
candidate from Eugene Debs to Jesse Jackson has faced.  Yet criticism
and debate is a healthy and necessary part of the process of building a
social justice movement that is rooted in the diverse and unequal
experiences of our society.  The idea that unity can be created solely
by seeking to overcome economic inequality — as a goal shared by all
working people — while putting all other concerns on the backburner is
false; all such attempts have come to grief on the realities of how
people understand the world they inhabit.  As the history of organized
labor has repeatedly shown, division is not caused by those who have
challenged racism or sexism, those who have challenged discrimination in
any form – rather division is caused by the reality of such
discrimination and perpetuated by those who wish to close their eyes to
truths others know to be true through experience.

The importance of incorporating that experience in the Sanders campaign
was expressed in an article by Bill Fletcher Jr. “The suggestion that
race can be resolved through an appeal to class and economic justice
alone suggests that economic justice will equally resolve the racial
differential,” Fletcher wrote.

 “It is not simply a matter of ‘a rising tide raises all boats’. The
reality is that all boats may rise, but who finds one’s self in which
portion of each boat? Or, to use the metaphor of the Titanic, who is in
steerage and who is closer to the main deck?

“When movements like \#BlackLivesMatter and many in the immigrant rights
movement point to this matter of racial injustice, they are not
suggesting attention for a ‘special interest.’ Rather, they are pointing
out that there can actually be no economic justice in the absence of
racial justice. There can be no unity without a commitment to the fight
for equality and justice. These struggles are interlinked.  The sort of
‘political revolution’ that the Sanders Campaign proclaims has been a
long time coming. Yet it will never arrive if there is not a full
recognition that the class struggle overlaps that of racial justice. The
ruling elites, for several centuries, have appreciated that race is the
trip wire of U.S. politics and social movements. When will progressives
arrive at the same conclusion?”

What follows is a consideration of several ways of connecting the dots
to which Fletcher alludes.  Taken together as an overview they may
inform an orientation toward the Sanders campaign in its specificity and
toward the broader challenge of addressing universality and difference,
of building a unity that is genuine because it is built upon an
appreciation of the fuller dimension of how social injustices impact
upon individuals in all aspects of life.

**Courage  **

The late comedian George Carlin once did a whole riff on how we
overvalue the word “courage.”  Courage on behalf of what is the question
that lies begging – courage when engaging in brutal and cruel behavior,
in the midst of brutal and cruel warfare, does nothing to change the
underlying reality of pain and suffering inflicted upon those who are
victims.  This glorification of “courage” without reference to content
is upheld too when someone is praised for speaking his or her (but
almost always it is a “he” being praised) mind without softening words
or bowing to “political correctness.”  Ignored is the veracity of what
is being said, for only the tone is praised – and ignored too is whether
the words are used hurt others, hinder understanding, promote hate.
  The use of abstract words to distort the meaning they are presumed to
have speaks to Hemingway’s critique of language.

Nonetheless courage – and indeed integrity, freedom, democracy, equality
– can be made meaningful words, but only so long as they are linked to
broader purposes, so long as they become concrete.  It is this
definition of courage that Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (a once-brilliant
basketball player, an always-thoughtful and principled human being)
applied in a recent *Washington Post* op-ed that helps shed light on the
relationship of Bernie Sanders to Black Lives Matter and, beyond that,
says a great deal about political choices that need to be made over and
again.  To quote:

  “Ernest Hemingway once said that courage was ‘grace under pressure.’ 
Two presidential candidates, Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders, have
recently tested this proposition.  And how each man responded revealed
the type of person he is and the type of president he would make:  Trump
authored his own doom, and Sanders opened immense new possibilities as a
compassionate person and serious candidate for president.”

The negative example Abdul-Jabbar uses is Trump’s crude and bullying
response to Megyn Kelly’s questions about his publicly contemptuous
attitudes toward women.  As Kareem notes, Trump’s response was not only
an attack on women, but also an attack on the First Amendment – for free
speech and freedom of the press themselves become empty terms when
someone in position of power uses their voice to attack and silence
others.  It was an approach Trump also took toward Univision, when
refusing to answer questions about his attacks on Mexican immigrants –
and his veiled threat to the First Amendment goes in tandem with his
direct attack on the 14^th^ Amendment which gives citizenship rights to
immigrants but also significantly gave citizenship rights to black
Americans, rights denied notwithstanding generations of having lived in
this country.

And that brings us to the contrast with Sanders, for the article goes on
to say,

“… Bernie Sanders faced his own challenge at a political event … when
two African American women pushed in front of him to use the microphone
to demand four and a half minutes of silence to honor the death of
Michael Brown.  Sanders left the stage and mingled with the crowd. 
Later, Trump criticized Sanders as being ‘weak’ for allowing them to
speak, but truly he showed grace under pressure by acknowledging their
frustration and anger.  Instead of bullying their voices into silence or
ridiculing them as losers, pigs or bimbos, Sanders left.  After all, it
was not his event; he was a guest.  Besides, his voice was not silenced,
but came back booming even louder:  The next day, Sanders posted a
sweeping policy of reform to fight racial inequality.”

**Context**

The emergence of Black Lives Matter and the ever-widening support for
Sanders anti-austerity message and call for a “political revolution”
stem from the same source – the deepening patterns of inequality and
insecurity that remain even in the midst of current economic growth and
job growth.  The stagnation in the US economy has lasted more than a
generation now, and has been accompanied by an atrophying of our
political system in which corporate power is expressed ever more openly
and directly.  The sense that there is no way out, that the system has
failed, is the basis of the appeal not only of Trump, but more generally
of Republican politicians and ideologists who use the sense of
grievance, the sense of loss and decline, to point fingers and lay
blame.  Key to that is the separation of societal problems faced by most
from the problems of inequality faced by many within the overall sense
of our country’s decline; a separation which makes it easy to shift
responsibility for the current state of affairs from corporate power to
those who were excluded during the putative “good times” of a past long
gone – be that working women, be that Latino (or Asian or Muslim)
immigrants, be that African Americans unwilling to live second-class
lives.   Because a system with separate and unequal categories of rights
can’t be justified in so direct a fashion, it manifests itself in
cultural issues, in attacks on abortion or gay marriage, in promoting
fear of black crime or Arab terrorism or Latino drug dealers, in
rhetoric about anchor babies and “illegals,” and in both
rationalizations of violence against women and the use of racialized
tropes to project fear of people of color assaulting “our” women – and
thus to justify police and vigilante-style attacks upon those deemed
“other.”

Such a line of thought can be projected in “objective” social forms of
charter schools, gentrification, bank lending practices that lead to
disparities in wealth, health, education, employment or in the demagogic
blaming-the-victim forms taken today by Trump, Cruz, Walker and their
ilk.  But what is relevant here is that an attempt to overcome
injustices by a change in economic policy alone is insufficient to
redirect people’s anger or hopes.  For the appeal of conservatives lies
in the pretense that a measure of economic security and opportunity will
be possible if the egalitarian impulse of those who have less is
rejected.  And hence the need for advocates of universal measures
ranging from health care to all to living wage initiatives to also
address the issues of inequality – and issues of war, civil liberties,
the environment, the whole panoply of concerns that are in fact if not
always in immediate appearance, class issues inherent in the conflict
between labor and capital.   The increase of violence and fear of
violence in everyday life is coextensive with the increase in
insecurity, the point Angela Davis made in a talk given in February when
the focus of popular anger was centered on Ferguson:

“… ‘Why the mobilizations now?’  Davis asked. Some would assume it’s
because so many black men and boys have been killed within a short
amount of time; however, she reminded us that the issue of black men
being targets of police violence is [*not a new
occurrence*](http://inthesetimes.com/article/17398/darren_wilson_not_indicted),
and it is important to correct the notion that it is. ‘There has been an
unbroken line of racist police killings since the era of slavery,’ Davis
declared.  Davis directly attributes [*police militarization to the war
on
terror*](http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2011/11/how-the-war-on-terror-has-militarized-the-police/248047/),
also saying that the war on terror has redefined what it means to be an
immigrant and legitimized anti-Muslim prejudice and violence. …
\[therefore\] when addressing racism, other inequalities cannot be
ignored. Racial and sexual violence are two modes of violence that have,
historically, been particularly overlooked as well as allowed and
accepted. ‘The pandemic of intimate violence is not disconnected from
state violence,’ Davis said.   She then called upon us all to ‘speak out
against economic exploitation, against war, against the destruction of
the environment, against anti-Muslimism and anti-Semitism, against
gender bias and homophobia, for access to good organic non-GMO food, for
free health care and free education for all.’ ”

**Connections**

The linkage of issue to issue is not the same as a laundry list that
includes one item after another, united only by being written on the
same piece of paper.  Rather such inclusion speaks to how the lives of
each and all are complex and themselves interconnected.  And it only
serves those who wish to maintain existing relationships of power and
subordination to pretend otherwise.   The legal challenges to labor law
which, if successful, could largely undo the protections (weak and under
assault as they be) are certainly distinct from various proposal
designed to both make the lot of immigrants currently in the US more
precarious, to lock many of them into a permanent system of lesser
rights, and to make entry into the country more dangerous and more
desperate.  And indeed they are and do require distinct responses.  So
too are the issues of poverty and hunger distinct from the issue of
choice and reproductive health for women.  Yet so too they are as one
for they are connected in the bodies and lives of those who experience
them as a totality.

Dolores Huerta, a founder and Vice President emeritus of the United Farm
Workers (and an honorary chair of Democratic Socialists of America),
certainly has lived these together and the work she has done as an
organizer and activist has been all these arenas – the struggle for an
end to poverty and for union representation, the demand for women’s
rights and the rights of immigrants.  A unity in difference is evident
in her defense of Planned Parenthood:

“People who oppose women’s access to health care have spent years
attacking Planned Parenthood with too many smears and distortions to
count. But the one that truly makes my blood boil is the claim that
because so many women who turn to Planned Parenthood are people of color
… Planned Parenthood must be racist! A spokesperson for the right-wing
Libre Initiative just made this attack, accusing Planned Parenthood of
‘target\[ing\] minority communities’ and of working to diminish the
’political power’ of women of color. … When we say that Planned
Parenthood does extensive work in communities of color, that’s because
women in those communities are deciding for themselves that they need
the help Planned Parenthood offers. When a woman — especially a
low-income woman — needs or desires access to contraception, a cancer
screening, and yes, even an abortion, she can go to Planned Parenthood.
Having that access means she has the ability to control her own health
and her own future. That is not targeting or diminishing women. Instead,
it’s allowing them to have the dignity of making their own medical
decisions, a right that so many people in the United States take for
granted but that Latinas are too often denied. …

“To put it simply: Attacking Planned Parenthood for providing Latinas
with reproductive health services is another way of saying that Latinas
shouldn’t have access to reproductive health services at all.  If some
people want to attack Planned Parenthood, that’s their right. But they
should be honest about what they’re attacking. They’re attacking our
access to health care, birth control and abortion.”

In her remarks we see the same logic that asked the Sanders campaign to
address issues of racism and police violence – not as a distraction from
his demand for universal economic justice for all, but to strengthen
that demand.  It was a logic that he and his campaign understood and are
increasingly coming to embrace.

**Closing the Circle**

Returning to a contrasting comparison along the lines made by Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar, Cornel West \[amongst his many other distinctions, West is
also an honorary chair of DSA\] stated in an interview that:

“Brother Bernie and Brother Trump share one thing in common: They speak
to the anti-establishment impulse among those who are looking for some
candidates who are for real, as opposed to the superficial, donor-driven
politicians that usually are dominant in any election cycle.  \[Trump\]
says, *I have been a donor, I have been a participant in this corrupt
system for 30 years*. But all of a sudden now he’s going to make America
great again?  No. Plutocratic corruption of government is unpatriotic. I
don’t know how you’re going to be so much in love with America but
you’re participating in plutocratic corruption of the system and then
you wake up now 30 years later and say, ‘Lo and behold, I’m going to be
the savior of overcoming the corruption.’ No, that lacks integrity.  He
has authenticity, but he doesn’t have integrity. Bernie Sanders has
authenticity, but he’s also got integrity. Integrity, of course, doesn’t
mean that you agree with everything that a politician does. But it’s
just so rare that you get authenticity and integrity.”

“Authenticity,” like “courage” can be reduced to rhetoric without
substance, yet rhetoric which finds a chord amongst people with a desire
for public speech that is direct and unadulterated, unlike the
poll-driven language devoid of belief offered up by most Republican (and
Democratic) candidates for higher office.  But addressing popular
discontent and promising change, without challenging the corporate power
at the center of our economic and political system can only find one
outlet – scapegoating people; a “populist” racism is the only place
authenticity such as Trump’s can go.

On the other hand, the integrity of Sanders is connected to a critique
of the structural economic and political injustices rooted in capitalist
society, injustices which give political meaning to the projection of a
socialist alternative, injustices which can only be addressed by
opposing all forms of such injustice rather than appealing to some in
order to further step on others.  West sees Sanders’ integrity in those
terms, terms which allow him to make a deeper and fuller critique of
contemporary US capitalism than does Sanders.  West has been doing that,
most recently when campaigning with and for Bernie in South Carolina. 
In the same interview as quoted above, he explains how he sees those
interconnections:

“… how do we come up with a language that allows a coalescing to take
place, so that we don’t end up with narrow talk about diversity and
inclusion within a neoliberal framework? That is basically what the
Democratic Party is all about. It’s about diversity and inclusion within
a neoliberal framework.  That’s got to be radically called into
question. You can call it into question in the name of fighting against
white supremacy. Wonderful. You can call it into question in the name of
fighting against economic injustice and class inequality. That’s
wonderful.

“But when it comes to movements, we’ve got to interweave the struggle
against white supremacy with the struggle against economic injustice,
with the struggle against homophobia, with the struggle against
patriarchy, and any form of xenophobia. Anti-Jewish hatred,
anti-Palestinian hatred, anti-Arab hatred, anti-Muslim hatred. How do we
talk about all of those simultaneously?

“Twenty-five years ago, people talked about it in terms of fighting for
radical democracy. Once you have the empowerment of everyday people
across the board, then you’re able to wed what people traditionally call
‘identity politics’ with what people call ‘class-centered politics’
because the two are so inseparable that you can’t talk about one without
the other. I think there’s something to be said for that position.”

It is a position we can now fight for and through the Sanders campaign. 
Rather than ask people who feel left out to silence their voices, we can
construct a path that makes the inseparability between “identity
politics,” and “class-centered politics” central to all socialist
politics.

**Conclusion**

Most of those who are active in building Sanders’ campaign, just as most
of those active in the streets protesting police violence, are young.  A
contrast to the voices in the articles above – although themselves of
differing generations, it is true that Huerta, Davis, Abdul-Jabbar, West
and Fletcher all were decisively influenced by the transformations and
struggles of the ‘60s and ‘70s, whether in the heart of them or just
coming of age in that era.  And this influences the perspective they
bring to bear on the issues of the intersectionality of race, gender,
nationality and class, on the relationship between movement and
electoral politics – even given the significant differences between them
(as can be gleaned in the varying emphasis in the perspectives noted
above).  The period – roughly coinciding from the Montgomery Bus Boycott
through to Nixon’s resignation – saw a tremendous upsurge of activism
which sought to expand the gains of the New Deal to the country as a
whole, an expansion which brought to the surface hidden/suppressed
tensions and manifested itself in an enormous number of political,
cultural and social movements which transformed our society, yet fell
short of needed social transformation.  Instead we had the reaction of
Reagan, of neo-liberalism, of the Democratic Leadership Council, of a
sharpened conflict between so-called identity politics and a narrow
supposed class politics that saw each other as the problem.  As reaction
continued, such tensions became muted in a shared attempt to maintain
some radical vision, some measure of progressive politics.

Today we are in a renewed moment where popular movements are again on
the offensive, demanding what could be rather than simply resisting
another loss.  In such circumstances it is not surprising that there are
disagreements over how to move forward, how to be inclusive without
privileging one voice over the other.  To date, certainly, it seems that
much has been learned from the past; we are not seeing a replay of the
dynamic that undermined transformatory  politics two generations ago. 
Still, the danger remains.  And, yet and so too does the possibility of
concretizing hope in a way that can rebuild our democracy, establish
social justice, and give greater relevance to a socialist project as
diverse as our society, as united as our collective needs.  It is a
perspective which can be furthered through the Sanders campaign so long
as we root the political in the everyday experience of life in a society
with multiple forms of hierarchy and division.  The possibility of such
taking place may be gleaned in a resolution adopted this summer by
National Nurses United entitled “Black Lives Matter and the Health
Impact of Societal Racial Disparities”:

“While there are clear correlations between structural racism in the
criminal justice system and economic and social justice, each area is
also a clear and present danger to life and health, as well as an
infringement on the human rights of those affected and on American
democracy. As nurses, we are dedicated to preventing all forms of
illness, protecting health, and alleviating human suffering. …
\[therefore the\] NNU supports efforts at comprehensive solutions
including, but not limited to:

-   **Comprehensive criminal justice reforms**, including national
    > standards for greater public oversight, accountability, and
    > prosecution for rights violations …

-   **Systemic prison and sentencing reform** to reduce mass
    > incarcerations and disparities, and improved prison and jail
    > health services.

-   **Genuine, universal guaranteed healthcare** based on a single
    > standard of quality care for everyone …

-   **An end to austerity economic policie**s that disproportionately
    > affect minority populations. ….”

That resolution was consistent with the one the NNU adopted shortly
thereafter on the presidential campaign:   “Caring, compassion, and
community. These are the values at the heart of registered nursing. This
is true at the bedside, as nurses advocate for patients and families—and
also beyond the walls of the hospital, as RNs call for
[*environmental*](http://www.nationalnursesunited.org/state/environmental-justice),
[*racial*](http://www.nationalnursesunited.org/press/entry/nnu-statement-on-black-lives-matter-and-the-health-impact-of-societal-racia/)*,*
and [*economic*](http://www.robinhoodtax.org/) justice in the name of
public health. National Nurses United, which represents some 190,000
nurses nationwide, seeks to uphold that positive vision for the health
of this country by endorsing Senator Bernie Sanders for president.”

Grace under pressure unites all such movements in multiple ways as this
overview seeks to show – courage of convictions rests in the grace given
through respect to one and all.

\*\*\*\*\*

**Sources:**

Bill Fletcher Jr. – “Why We Cannot Speak of Economic Injustice Alone,
or, Why Race Matters” *Democratic Left*, 8/28/15

[*http://www.dsausa.org/why\_we\_cannot\_speak\_of\_economic\_injustice\_alone\_or\_why\_race\_matters*](http://www.dsausa.org/why_we_cannot_speak_of_economic_injustice_alone_or_why_race_matters)

Kareem Abdul-Jabbar – This is the Difference Between Donald Trump and
Bernie Sanders, Washington Post, 9/2/15

[*http://portside.org/2015-09-05/kareem-abdul-jabbar-difference-between-donald-trump-and-bernie-sanders*](http://portside.org/2015-09-05/kareem-abdul-jabbar-difference-between-donald-trump-and-bernie-sanders)

Summer Noble – Angela Davis Speaks on Racism and Police Militarization
at Annual MLK Jr. Convocation” *Huffington Post,* 4/4/15

[*http://www.huffingtonpost.com/summer-noble/angela-davis-speaks-on-ra\_b\_6601260.html*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/summer-noble/angela-davis-speaks-on-ra_b_6601260.html)

Dolores Huerta –“Shame on Those Who Smear Planned Parenthood, an
Essential Resource to Latinos,” *People for the American Way* *Blog*,
8/27/15

[*http://www.pfaw.org/category/people/dolores-huerta*](http://www.pfaw.org/category/people/dolores-huerta)

Zeeshan Aleem – “Cornell West Speaks About Endorsing Bernie Sanders,
Black Lives Matter and Donald Trump,” *Policy.Mic*, 8/26/15

[*http://mic.com/articles/124427/cornel-west-talks-about-endorsing-bernie-sanders-black-lives-matter-and-donald-trump\#*](http://mic.com/articles/124427/cornel-west-talks-about-endorsing-bernie-sanders-black-lives-matter-and-donald-trump)

NNU – “Statement on Black Lives Matter and the Health Impact of Societal
Racial Disparities,” *National Nurses United Press Release*, 7/23/15

[*https://talkingunion.wordpress.com/page/3/*](https://talkingunion.wordpress.com/page/3/)

NNU – “National Nurses United Endorses Senator Bernie Sanders for
President,” *National Nurses United Press Release*, 8/17/15

<http://www.nationalnursesunited.org/site/entry/vote-nurses-values>

[*Clinton, the Successor to
Reagan*](http://dsadc.org/the-persistent-influence-of-the-reaganthatcher-ideaplex/)

Wednesday, September 30th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2015**

A review of *The Extreme Centre: A Warning* By Tariq Ali (Verso, 2015)

*By Dave Richardson*

I have always wondered why it was so important for Bill Clinton to push
NAFTA, which undermined working conditions for the bottom 80 percent in
both the U.S. and Mexico, through Congress.  This especially galls me
inasmuch as, while George H. W. Bush was in favor of it, the Democrats
blocked it until Clinton came in.  I’ve also wondered why Clinton did
away with traditional welfare, replacing it with the temporary TANF
program, which threw so many families, very largely his supporters, into
extreme poverty.  The 2000 repeal of the Glass-Steagal Act, which
eliminated financial regulations which might have prevented the 2008
financial collapse, also occurred on Clinton’s watch.

Tariq Ali presents the case that the political dominance of the extreme
centre bears the responsibility.  *The Extreme Centre* itself is a long
op-ed, which offers an explanation in the parallel history of the U.S.
and the U.K., with the Democrats continuing and fulfilling the programs
of Ronald Reagan and the British Labor Party doing the same with respect
to the programs of Margaret Thatcher.  In both cases, “\[t\]hey refuse
to step down and talk to the people whose worlds they have destroyed.”
(p. 4)  Even the names they gave themselves, Clinton’s Third Way and
Tony Blair’s New Labor, evoke similar images, that of turning away from
the needs and concerns of their supporters.

The term “extreme centre” refers to the hard right turn after 1989 by
the more conservative parties followed by a similar turn by the more
progressive parties as they followed suit.  As Ali puts it, “\[w\]hen
the Berlin Wall went down in 1989, it took European Social Democracy
with it.” (p. 2)  Further, “\[c\]apitalism, intoxicated by its victory
and unchallenged from any quarter, no longer felt the need to protect
its left flank by conceding any more reforms. … social democracy became
redundant.” (pp. 2-3)  Not only that, but earlier reforms had to be
rolled back in the name of reform or progress or some other
nice-sounding term.

Ali is a master of words, and once we come across the term “extreme
centre,” we have an aha! experience and understand just what has
happened.  Similarly, he refers to most of the quasi-independent states
scattered across the globe as “U.S. protectorates,” with the U.K. as a
“U.S. vassal,” once again terms that clarify a lot of recent world
history.  Referring to countries as protectorates seems to me superior
to just invoking “the Empire,” for its specificity and obvious
connection to reality.  “The Empire,” on the other hand, incorrectly
connotes some kind of similarity to the very different British or Roman
empires.

In Britain Blair’s New Labor kept the trade unions at arms’ length, and
after two years in office “the gap between executive salaries and the
average wage was the largest in Europe.” (p. 22)  “Between 1990 and 1996
a million people lost their homes through repossession, while 390,000”
formerly publicly owned homes were repossessed. (p. 22)  At the very
beginning of its term, New Labor cut single mothers’ welfare by 11
pounds per week and established tuition for the previously-free public
universities, policies that the Conservatives hadn’t been willing to
even propose. (p. 26)  These ‘reforms’ didn’t make much of an impression
on the budget, but they sent a message: New Labor had chosen which side
it was on.

Despite its brilliance, at 192 pp. the book itself is probably 172 pp.
too long for the American reader.  Born in what is now Pakistan, Ali has
lived in Britain since he matriculated at Oxford University in the early
1960s, and is naturally much more concerned with the U.K., and Europe in
general, than the U.S.  Thus, in a sense, this review misrepresents the
book by its overwhelming American emphasis.  While we all know about the
enormous fortune acquired by the Clintons after Bill left office, Ali
spends 12 pages documenting the largesse received by members of the
cabinet of Blair and his successor Gordon Brown after they were replaced
by the Tories.

*The Extreme Centre* is dedicated to Hugo Chavez, and a great deal of
Ali’s hope for the future rests on the independence movement in Latin
America, where Venezuela, Ecuador, and Bolivia have thrown off the U.S.
protectorate, established themselves as independent countries, and
encouraged other countries in the region to follow.  Nevertheless,
independence movements have been crushed in Haiti, Honduras, and
Paraguay, while Brazil seems to have lost its way and is imposing
austerity, and Argentina is struggling in U.S courts with debt problems.

Another challenge comes from the BRICS group, Brazil, Russia, India,
China, and South Africa.  The heart of this group is China, which by
some measures has surpassed the U.S. in terms of the size of its
economy.  The main threat from China is that its economy may soon be so
large that it will be able to afford military expenditures that the U.S.
cannot match, and hence the rate of economic growth is the key number to
watch.  In his discussion, however, Ali loses his way by diverting
attention to a great many side issues and thus downplaying the main
story.

Ali really does have a way with words, as you may have noticed from the
quotes above, and *The Extreme Centre* is an enjoyable read.  However,
his case fits together a little bit too well, and I am concerned that
the background data is being massaged a bit more than I am comfortable
with.  Nevertheless, his brilliance cannot be denied, and no serious
student of politics can afford to be ignorant of his views.

**Appendix I**: THE CLINTON RECORD, more completely

Not only did Clinton abandon “any pretense of a New Deal,” (p. 20) but
NAFTA really hurt, and “\[i\]n 1998, the \[real\] wages of the bottom
80% were lower than they had been in 1989, and significantly lower than
in 1979.” (p. 24)  The U.S. is the only capitalist country where workers
have actually had to increase their hours to maintain their living
standards, if not just to survive.  The march of inequality continued
apace, as the ratio of CEO incomes to those of ordinary workers, which
had increased from 42:1 in 1980 to 85:1 in 1990, quadrupled to 326:1 in
1997. (p. 24)  “The ruling elites … which so vigorously and shamelessly
promoted their political system to win over the peoples of Eastern
Europe, are now quietly disencumbering themselves of that very system.”
(p. 10)

In fairness, we should note that Clinton has pushed through some
reasonably progressive legislation, e.g., his 1993 tax cut for the
middle & lower classes, which simultaneously raised them for the top 1.2
percent.  He also reversed the Reagan/Bush restrictions on abortions,
expanded the Earned Income Tax Credit, and saw the passage of the Brady
Bill, with a 5-day waiting period for handgun purchases.    Overseas,
yielding to pressure he returned Aristide to office in Haiti, withdrew
US support for UNITA in Angola, and supported the overthrow of Mobutu in
Zaire/Congo.  However, the effect of these progressive victories pales
in comparison with the major harm imposed by NAFTA, the elimination of
welfare, the undermining of financial regulation, and his budget
surpluses, which led directly to the 2001 recession.

More mixed is Clinton’s don’t ask, don’t tell policy for the military,
which seemed progressive at the time but not later.  And he famously
tried and failed to establish a health care system for all.  On the
anti-progressive side, he pushed through DOMA, which defined marriage as
between one man and one woman, bombed Serbia, maintained the murderous
Iraq sanctions regime, and left Somalia a failed state.  For his
troubles he was rewarded by earnings of over \$160 million in the period
2001 to 2011, and much more since.

**Appendix II:** THE OBAMA RECORD

Lest we think that Obama has been any better, we should consider that
his term in office has been one of unending recession, largely as a
result of his 2009 \$787 billion economic stimulus package, which was
known at the time to be too small.  Nevertheless, he found \$3,000
billion to bail out financial and real estate enterprises, with hardly a
crumb for underwater homeowners.  At the same time, Obama is trying to
double down on NAFTA with the Trans-Pacific Partnership and a similar
Atlantic trade deal.  And he shares with Clinton the distinction of
being the ones who have destroyed the Democratic Party by eliminating
its hold on Congress and state governments.

Obama also has some real progressive achievements, especially in terms
of Obamacare, which expanded Medicaid in addition to making health
insurance affordable for millions.  He also saw through the Lilly
Ledbetter Act, which relaxed the statute of limitations on equal pay
lawsuits, expanded SCHIP, the State Children’s Health Insurance Program,
and put through Dodd -Frank, which pretended to restore regulation to
the financial sector and actually did set up the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau.  And he may yet make millions eligible for overtime
pay.  Overseas he established diplomatic relations with Cuba and
negotiated the Iran nuclear treaty.

More mixed are Obama’s efforts to end Iraq and Afghan Wars and the Tax
Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of
2010, which continued the Bush tax cuts but achieved some progressive
goals.

On the anti-progressive side, he walked away from his campaign pledge to
pass card-check union recognition.  He proposed budget sequestration,
which has undermined the ability of the federal government to fulfill
its mission, and has undermined public education by pushing charter
schools.  Obama disregarded elections in Egypt, Haiti, Honduras,
Paraguay, Ukraine and Venezuela.  The effect of this was a failed
attempt to end Venezuelan independence, but a successful move to
establish a U.S. protectorate in Ukraine.  Disregarding elections in the
other four prevented them from establishing themselves as independent
states free of U.S. protection.  In the pursuit of new protectorates,
Obama created failed states in Libya, Syria, and now Yemen.

[*Culture, Politics, and Black Lives
Matter*](http://dsadc.org/culture-politics-and-black-lives-matter/)

Wednesday, September 30th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2015**

*By Daniel C. Adkins*

American culture has some advantages and some blind spots.  One tendency
of some younger Americans is to believe that the world was created when
they were born and anything before that is just history and therefore
not important.  The advantage to this belief is that some parents are
not automatically able to share their prejudices with their children and
aspects of racism are diminished.  However, the disadvantage is that one
misses understanding the flow of history.  We remain ignorant of our
people’s and the world’s diverse histories.

This weakness becomes clearer, for example, when President George W.
Bush gets us into an Iraq war without understanding the centuries-old
conflict between Sunni and Shiite Islam.  He believed any Shiite backing
the invasion was for democracy and the U.S.  Some Shiites had their own
agenda: Shiite domination (or, in Iraq, Payback).  In the Iraq War our
leaders were blinded by ideology and a lack of cultural and political
understanding.

So if you do not know your history you will be less prepared to effect
change and less prepared to recognize the allies that you will need.
 One disadvantage of ignoring history, to take a very current example,
is that you fail to take into account America’s original sins: slavery
and native genocide.  Slavery was an economic mode that kept blacks’
wages down to zero for the profit of the slave-masters and a social
racism that cemented their political power.  It was amazing that
Jefferson wrote that “all men are created equal” in the age of absolute
monarchy.  But the sad reality is that this slave-owner’s personal life
never matched his ideals.  Jefferson was able to abolish the slave trade
(1807) but it took the Civil War to end slavery.  The postwar
Reconstruction period involved white Southerners reestablishing their
control by discriminatory laws, marginal educational opportunities for
African-Americans, and terror.  The terror ranged from Ku Klux Klan
raids and lynching to enforced servitude and Jim Crow segregation, which
functioned to economically depress African-American wages and education.

Despite the perceptions of the broader public, for many African
Americans today it is not clear that the terror or Jim Crow has ended,
with police shootings and mysterious hanging “suicides.”  Ferguson, Mo.,
known best for a singular police shooting of an unarmed young black man,
has  also exemplified law enforcement that uses fines as a “police
department profit center,” with arrests leading to unaffordable bail
that keeps African-Americans destabilized in the community and
workplace.  Only 16 percent of those arrested can make bail, often for
nonviolent offenses that don’t seem to require bail.

The militarization of local police (in Ferguson and throughout the
nation) creates an “us or them” logic that erases citizen-government
ties.  These practices have revised the police motto of “Protect and
Serve” to “Exploit and Sabotage” in some towns.

Amazingly, the example of Ferguson and the policy of police
militarization misses the lesson learned in the Iraq surge.  The surge’s
main goal was protecting the population from each other and Al Qaida,
not killing insurgents.  The surge in Iraq succeeded in defeating Al
Qaida by moving troops into Iraqi neighborhoods to protect them and
learn from them.  The militarization of police in the US does the
opposite and makes it more difficult to talk to citizens and to know
neighborhoods.

Ferguson shows history repeating itself with a local white-led
government using tactics that extract revenues from African-Americans,
keep them poor, and sabotage a sense of community.  If you do know your
history you are not surprised at man’s urge to profit from others in
unequal power relationships, and then you are better prepared to do
something about it. Still, you have to wonder if the past has even
passed. Certainly the Black Lives Matter movement that began in Ferguson
is trying to make sure the echoes of history are not overlooked.

When it comes to remedies, many white progressives identify with Senator
Bernie Sanders’ policies, see them as a remedy for many kinds of
inequalities, and support him.  The last recession, and illuminating
responses such as Occupy Wall Street, made clearer how the billionaire
class was running the country and us into the ground.   The logic of
capitalism and its “free market” enablers in Wall Street and the
government have allowed the nation’s profits to fall into the hands of
the super rich.  This has led to no new raises for the middle class and
cuts in support and opportunity for the poor.  Today’s middle class has
more financial instability with two wage-earners today than with one in
the 1950s.  New college grads are often faced with loan debts (profits
for banks and the government) that sabotage their family life.  The poor
and many minorities face an even steeper road and less support out of
poverty.  Success today is enabled with early childhood educational
enrichments that are often out of reach of the poor who face marginal
schools. Capitalism afflicts both middle class and poor, but the effects
are different.

Bernie Sanders’s campaign gives the 99 percent a chance to push back
against inequality overall.  But his economic programs and proposals do
not specifically focus on minorities, and Ferguson has shown us that
some policies targeting the poor need to change.

Black Lives Matter is an organic and vigorous response to deadly police
tactics.  BLM and Bernie got off to a rough start, when activists
interrupted one of his speeches and were booed by some of the audience. 
But despite the bad start a dialog was begun.  Some Bernie supporters
were slow to see the necessity of allying with BLM.  With all the talk
of diversity, we are still caught up in our own communities, cultures,
and histories.  This is a major weakness of all Americans, including
progressives.

So progressives have focused on the economic aspects of inequality,
envisioning social change in parallel.  The minimum \$15 per hour wage
may free workers from multiple jobs and an 80-hour work week.  This
would give them a chance for a civic, political, and family life.  More
extensive education could allow black workers better jobs and a more
stability.  Health care as a right can minimize the main cause of
bankruptcy.  The failure of Ferguson was not just the police, but a
system that undercut African-Americans from being the leaders in a
community in which they are the majority.  BLM is developing policies to
support its objectives and Bernie will not be far behind.

Combating the billionaire class and its off-shoots will require the
alliance of all the colors of the rainbow.  It will also require us to
be more knowledgeable and respectful of all of our cultures as well as
learning to work with allies.  We need the empathy that come from
understanding our allies and their histories.  This empathy can not be
based just on just books, but an understanding of how history has
crippled lives and opportunities for the many while gaining riches for
the few.

ADDENDUM: WHEN LIVES ARE SO DIFFERENT, HOW FAR CAN EMPATHY REACH?

Working as allies with Black Lives Matter (BLM) raises the question of
whether white progressives can really empathize with African-Americans
threatened by militarized and biased police.  Below are two personal
histories that question white capabilities in this matter.

Colonel Robert Gould Shaw was an abolitionist who commanded the
Massachusetts 54^th^ Regiment in the Civil War.  He had joined the union
army, fought in several battles, and had been wounded.  He was given
command and trained the newly formed Mass. 54^th^ Regiment, one of the
very first African-American regiments, which was sent to the South
Carolina Sea Islands.    On an advance into Confederate territory to
destroy cotton and other supplies, Col. Shaw talked politely to the wife
of a plantation owner.  His troops were not amused.  Afterward several
of his African-American troops showed him the instruments of
“discipline” and torture that were used to keep slaves in line.  He got
educated.  In a battle after that episode Col. Shaw and many of his men
died in an attack on the Confederate Fort Wagner.  That attack ended the
questioning of Black troops’ valor and greatly expanded the use of
African-American soldiers.  You cannot ask more of someone than to give
his or her life for the abolition of slavery, but intellectually
understanding the horrors of a system cannot be compared to living in
the system.

When I saw the film the film *Glory* portraying the fight of the 54^th^,
I cried.  I could say that I cried for the men of the 54^th^ fighting
for liberty, and I did, but it was because I had lost someone who fought
for liberty.  In my life there has always been a hole where my
biological father might have been.  My father died leading a Marine
platoon in attack on Iwo Jima (World War Two).  In the attack, half of
his men were either killed or wounded.  When hit, he refused medical aid
by the corpsman and ordered him to take care of the platoon’s Marines
first.  He was shot again and died.  My father took responsibility for
confronting totalitarianism and for the care of his Marines.  My belief
in democratic socialism is an extrapolation of my father’s action
against fascism and his care for those around him.  If you can die for
your platoon and country, why not live for humanity and our home the
Earth?

Sadly, people in the African-American community die by gunfire too. 
When they die by police action, poor police training, or racism on the
part of those who should be helping and protecting them, it is a
betrayal of our whole society.  Although I have lost a loved one to
gunfire, I do not claim to know the feelings of losing a loved one for
no good reason.

BLM is transforming these needless deaths into action to stop this
madness and the evolution of Jim Crow keeping Black people down in new
ways.  BLM urgency can be seen as an effort to make the racist deaths
have meaning.  Already two police chiefs have been retired for racist
behavior and more many police departments are rethinking their
policies.  BLM has given Bernie Sanders the priceless gift of realizing
his need to get into sync with the African American community.  Bernie
has no chance of winning the presidency unless he gets strong support
from the African American and Latino communities.  BLM helped by giving
him a wake-up call.

*In this article I have used the word “white” with great reluctance
because I find it humiliating that the word is still used to identify
Euro-Americans the way the slaveholders defined it.  It is too often
used to polarize people, not to help our needed social unity.*

[*GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS – OCTOBER
2015*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-october-2015/)

Wednesday, September 30th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2015**

More and more our good reads are coming from
[*Portside*](http://portside.org/), an aggregator of left-interest
articles. The site posts 4-5 articles a day. Interested readers can
subscribe to “Portside Snapshot” providing the day’s lineup in one
email; there are also specific cultural- and labor-themed subscriptions.

Bob Kuttner , writing in *Common Dreams*, on the trade debacle
[*http://portside.org/2015-09-22/americas-collapsing-trade-initiatives*](http://portside.org/2015-09-22/americas-collapsing-trade-initiatives)

And the trade deals’ effects on our region? Steve Shaff in the
*Baltimore Sun* says it would be bad for the kinds of business that
thrive and (sometimes even) create new jobs in the DMV…
[*http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/opinion/oped/bs-ed-tpp-20150602-story.html*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/opinion/oped/bs-ed-tpp-20150602-story.html)

Bill Fletcher Jr.  in *In These Times* leads a discussion with Black
Lives Matter activists about misperceptions of the movement and what
paths are available.
[*http://inthesetimes.com/article/18394/from-hashtag-to-strategy-the-growing-pains-of-black-lives-matter*](http://inthesetimes.com/article/18394/from-hashtag-to-strategy-the-growing-pains-of-black-lives-matter)

 

And in an article in DSA’s *Democratic Left*, Fletcher elaborates on the
engagement of socialist economic concerns with wider issues of race.
This article is also referenced in Kurt Stand’s article in this issue.
[*http://www.dsausa.org/why\_we\_cannot\_speak\_of\_economic\_injustice\_alone\_or\_why\_race\_matters*](http://www.dsausa.org/why_we_cannot_speak_of_economic_injustice_alone_or_why_race_matters)

\[Added Oct. 2 2015\] Lawrence Ware and Paul Buhle argue in
*Counterpunch* that C.L.R. James, author of *The Black Jacobins*, always
linked economic class issues to racism in the root causes of black
inequality.
[*http://www.counterpunch.org/2015/10/02/insurrectional-black-power-clr-james-on-race-and-class/*](http://www.counterpunch.org/2015/10/02/insurrectional-black-power-clr-james-on-race-and-class/)

Telling the story is an imperative for any communicator, but power
relations and differentials have a huge effect on public discourse:
Robert Parry on the “Power of False Narrative”
[*http://portside.org/2015-09-29/power-false-narrative*](http://portside.org/2015-09-29/power-false-narrative)

Jose Gutierrez’ interview with Jose La Luz in this issue points to
strong citizen resistance in Puerto Rico against the commonwealth’s
unjust treatment by the US government. This article from *New Politics*
indicates that the resistance is becoming more organized.
[*http://portside.org/2015-09-28/puerto-rico%E2%80%99s-new-party-working-people-fights-austerity*](http://portside.org/2015-09-28/puerto-rico%E2%80%99s-new-party-working-people-fights-austerity)

[*Is Puerto Rico the “Greece of the United States”- An Interview with
Puerto Rican Labor Activist Jose La
Luz*](http://dsadc.org/is-puerto-rico-the-greece-of-the-united-states-an-interview-with-puerto-rican-labor-activist-jose-la-luz/)

Wednesday, September 30th, 2015

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="3.0416666666666665in"}

***Jose La Luz***

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt; October 2015***

*By José Gutiérrez *

*\[This article* [**also appears
in**](http://www.dsausa.org/will_puerto_rico_be_the_greece_of_the_united_states_dl)
*the Fall issue of **Democratic Left**, the national publication of
Democratic Socialists of America\]*

*In late June, the governor of Puerto Rico, Alejandro Garcia Padilla,
announced that Puerto Rico would not incur any more indebtedness and
would not be able to meet its current debt obligations.  The crisis has
been compared to that of Greece, but the analogy is not correct.  For
background and ideas about how activists can become involved, I spoke
with José La Luz, a DSA vice chair and veteran trade unionist, worker
educator, and human rights activist. The interview has been condensed
and edited for clarity. As *Democratic Left *went to press, the
situation remained fluid.*

**Gutiérrez**: **The current situation of Puerto Rico has been compared
to that of Greece by some people, by others it has been compared to
Detroit. What can you tell us about how you perceive the current
economic crisis in Puerto Rico?**

**La Luz**: Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz has said that
Puerto Rico is the Greece of the Caribbean. The only problem with that
is that PR is not a sovereign country. PR is in fact the Greece of the
United States, and that is what I want to get across to progressives in
the United States. Puerto Rico being its largest territory, the United
States bears some responsibility for this debt that has grown to more
than 70 billion dollars. It is one of the highest per-capita debts in
the world, even higher per capita than Greece.

**Gutiérrez: Could you say something about how it got this way? The
United States has a big debt, what does Puerto Rico’s debt relate to?**

**La Luz:** The increase in the debt of Puerto Rico is a result of the
decline of the Puerto Rican economy. The manufacturing sector of Puerto
Rico, which to this day is around 46% of the island’s gross domestic
product, has been adversely affected by U.S. trade policy and by the
decision by Congress to phase out tax incentives that applied to Puerto
Rico until December 2005. Like New York City in the 1970s and Detroit
today, a decline in the manufacturing sector has led to lower revenues,
a loss of jobs, and residents leaving the island. This decline in the
economy has increased the need for social spending at the same time that
revenues are decreasing. The increased debt has led to a decline in the
credit rating of Puerto Rico, which before the crisis was positive. This
has limited the ability of Puerto Rico to borrow money to counteract the
decline in the private sector. It’s a vicious cycle that had started
just before the recession.

Two more factors have adversely affected the Puerto Rican economy. Under
the Merchant Marine Act of 1920, Puerto Rico has to ship goods using the
U.S. merchant marine, which increases the cost of importing and
exporting goods to the island. This law applies to Puerto Rico but not
to other U.S. territories, such as the U.S. Virgin Islands. This
bill affects the cost of living in Puerto Rico and should be phased out.
Second, the cost of energy is high because most the island’s electricity
comes from petroleum. The island passed Law 82 in 2010 mandating
increased use of renewable energy but it can’t spend or borrow enough
money to implement the mandate.

This debt has a direct impact on social spending. Programs that help the
neediest are severely cut. It results in massive cuts in public
services. The administration of Governor Luis Fortuño laid off more than
15,000 workers. In terms of the politics of austerity, it compares to
Detroit in the sense that Detroit went bankrupt. The fiscal and budget
crises there had a devastating impact on poor and working families. Yes,
there are comparisons, but the fundamental difference is that Greece is
a sovereign country and as such has some tools that it can use,
including restructuring of the debt, which is not an option that Puerto
Rico has by virtue of being a territory of the United States. Neither
does it have the tools that Detroit has to declare bankruptcy.

There is a broad coalition of nongovernmental organizations and unions
and even the business community that hopes to persuade the federal
government that Puerto Rico should have the ability to renegotiate its
debt with the Wall Street banks and the hedge funds. Former Governor
Anibal Acevedo Vila; Professor José Nicolás Medina, a well-known
constitutional attorney; and labor leader Roberto Pagán, one of the top
leaders of one of the SEIU affiliate in the island, argue that the
federal government has a legal and constitutional obligation to resolve
this crisis. The Obama administration has said that it will not
intervene. Progressives in the United States must be involved in
figuring out what can be done to find a solution to this crisis.

A group led by the Service Employees International Union in New York
City and other parts of the mainland in the Puerto Rican communities is
rallying some support to pressure the Obama administration. My view is
that the administration doesn’t have the political will and certainly
not the political capital to engage in this fight. This has to become an
issue for the presidential election. It’s far more important at this
point than thinking about solutions to the whole question of the
relationship of the island to the United States, which as you know, is a
perennial debate in Puerto Rico.

**Gutiérrez**: **In the long term, though, isn’t some resolution of the
relationship between the United States and Puerto Rico part of the
answer to the problems of Puerto Rico? Puerto Rico, with a population of
3.5 million people, has the same federal representation as the District
of Columbia, which is to say, none. Puerto Rico, as you mentioned is not
a sovereign country, it’s subject to federal law, which limits what it
can do.**

**La Luz**: No question about it. It would be irresponsible if I didn’t
say that. It is something that has taken and will take a long time to
resolve one way or the other.

Meanwhile, Puerto Ricans no longer migrate to the northeast and Chicago
as in the past. The explosive growth of the Puerto Rican vote in central
Florida could be the decisive vote in terms of who becomes the next
president of the United States. That was certainly the case in 2012
where the percentage of Puerto Ricans in Florida who voted for Obama was
73%. Arguably it was one of the main factors that led to Obama winning
Florida in 2012**.** If that happens again and that vote supports a
Democratic nominee, it could decide the election. But that vote
shouldn’t be given for free. It should be part of a commitment to find
solutions to the fiscal and economic crisis in the island.

**Gutiérrez**: **I understand that the Fortuño administration, the
previous administration, had suspended several collective agreements but
then at the end of his term many of those agreements were restored.**

**La Luz**:  I was intimately involved. I was dispatched to organize the
campaign to restore collective bargaining.  In effect, what happened is
that Law \#7, signed in March of 2009, abolished collective bargaining.
So we had to get a law enacted to restore bargaining rights and allow us
to renegotiate the contracts that had been frozen. Once again, a
coalition effort led by unions and allies in the religious community and
community organizations fought to restore bargaining rights, and that’s
why the contracts were renegotiated. But most likely what’s going to
happen now will be massive layoffs and freezing the contracts because
the government has no capacity to pay, and that will be disastrous.

**Gutiérrez**: **Would you say that the Garcia Padilla administration
has been better on labor rights than the Fortuño administration?**

**La Luz**: They all have to operate within the confines of the
government’s ability to pay. The Garcia Padilla administration, despite
the fiscal and economic constraints, has abided by the terms of the
collective agreements. Even though it hasn’t paid the full wage
increases that have been negotiated, it has tried for the most part to
do so. It has complied with contractual obligations. That may not be an
option now, if the finances of the government collapse totally.

This crisis is so imminent that all progressive forces in the United
States and in Puerto Rico have to work together to address this
emergency. The Obama administration needs to take action now and it has
to become an issue on which candidates for the nomination of the
Democratic Party take a position.

**(Sign a petition to end the debt of \#puertorico**
[***https://t.co/MkuGYz0qfh***](https://t.co/MkuGYz0qfh)**)**

*José Gutiérrez is a member of DSA’s national political committee, and
an executive board member of Metro DC DSA. Like José La Luz, he is from
Puerto Rico. The DSA National Political Committee’s statement on the
crisis in Puerto Rico is* [**on the DSA
website**](http://www.dsausa.org/puerto_rico)*. *

[*Jim Hightower Has Friends in Low Places that Aren’t Wall
Street*](http://dsadc.org/jim-hightower-has-friends-in-low-places-that-arent-wall-street/)

Wednesday, September 30th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2015**

*By M. Miller*

A forum and rally featuring the acerbic and hilarious populist Jim
Hightower on Oct. 22 stands out among many Metro DC Democratic
Socialists of America activities planned on behalf of the Bernie Sanders
presidential campaign in October. This event, among many others, is part
of the larger Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) [*We Need
Bernie*](http://www.dsausa.org/weneedbernie) campaign.

Unlike any other candidate for president, Sanders is refusing to take
corporate money to fund his campaign. He’s standing behind his values to
support working Americans instead of selling out to Wall Street
billionaires. As the DSA We Need Bernie campaign website states,
“Senator Sanders will challenge the dominant discourse of neoliberal
Democrats that privilege corporate business interests over those of all
working people.” As a result, “his candidacy could help expand both the
progressive movement and the democratic socialist voice within that
movement.” Sanders might not be a flawless candidate, and though he has
stated that he sympathizes with Democratic Socialism, he doesn’t always
perfectly align with socialism. But he is a strong voice for socialist
value of placing people over profits and his grassroots campaign is a
sharp departure from the “business as usual” attitude of neoliberal
politicians. For these reasons, DSA is supporting his campaign for the
Democratic nomination, and the Metro DC chapter is doing its part to
raise awareness about Bernie Sanders and his advocacy on behalf of
working Americans.

Activities by DC DSA as part of the auxiliary campaign for Bernie
Sanders include passing out petitions and flyers and having
conversations with people at local farmers markets in the greater DC
area. (Feel free to join us on Saturday, Oct. 3 at the U Street Farmers
Market on 14th and U, located
[*here*](https://www.google.com/maps/place/14th+%26+U+Farmers+Market/@38.9170139,-77.0319646,17z/data=%213m1%214b1%214m2%213m1%211s0x89b7b7e7c2088539:0xc64b640ca9777183),
from 9 a.m.-1 p.m.) We’ll also be canvassing neighborhoods in the DC
metro area throughout the month of October, starting on Columbus Day
weekend.

But the event we’re most excited about is a rally featuring Jim
Hightower to bring together progressive organizations in DC for Bernie
Sanders’s campaign. The event will be held on Oct. 22 from 6:30 p.m.-9
p.m. at Busboys and Poets on 5^th^ and K St., near the Gallery
Place/Convention Center and Mt Vernon Square Metro stops. Among other
speakers, *Nickel and Dimed* author Barbara Ehrenreich stands out. Local
politician and Busboys and Poets owner Andy Shallal will speak, along
with labor leader Larry Cohen. The keynote for the event will be the
entertaining and always on-point progressive agitator Jim Hightower. A
man of diverse talents and a former Texas agriculture commissioner,
Hightower is a radio commentator, author of seven books and syndicated
columnist, as well as a rousing speaker who knows how to galvanize the
99 percent to beat out the 1 percent. He’s well-known for his
newsletter, [**The Hightower
Lowdown**](http://www.hightowerlowdown.org/), and his biting wit and
clever humor. But under his hilarity lies the serious urgency of taking
this country back from the hedge fund managers and Wall Street
billionaires for the ordinary, working American families who make up
this nation. In his commitment to the grassroots, Hightower is a
powerful force to be reckoned with in American culture and a persuasive
advocate for Bernie Sanders’s campaign.

We hope to see you at the rally and at many of our other events and
activities in support of DSA’s auxiliary campaign for Bernie Sanders. Be
sure to spread the word among allied friends and organizations. To keep
up-to-date with this event and more, I encourage you to visit
[*dsadc.org*](http://dsadc.org/), join Metro DC DSA’s Facebook group
([*www.facebook.com/groups/DCDSA/*](http://www.facebook.com/groups/DCDSA/))
and join us on MeetUp
([*www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/)).

 

*Miller is co-organizer of the We Need Bernie campaign.*

[*What’s in a Name- Forum to Explore Whether Name of Washington
Professional Football Team Should be
Changed*](http://dsadc.org/whats-in-a-name-forum-to-explore-whether-name-of-washington-professional-football-team-should-be-changed/)

Wednesday, September 30th, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; October 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

A forum on Tuesday, October 27 will explore whether the Washington
professional football team’s name, which is regarded as racist and
offensive by many Native Americans, should be changed.

The forum will take place at Temple Shalom, 8401 Grubb Road in Chevy
Chase, Md., beginning at 7 p.m.

The speakers will be Tara Zhaabowekwe Houska, a tribal rights attorney,
and Mike Wise, a former sports columnist for the *Washington Post* and
now with ESPN.  Houska and Wise will look at the controversy surrounding
the team’s name and the stereotypes it perpetuates.   They also will
discuss the issue in the context of recent advances in civil rights,
including the seminal Supreme Court ruling on same-sex marriage and the
removal of the Confederate flag from public spaces around the country. 
Audience members will participate in a question-and-answer session after
the presentation.

Houska is a founding board member of [*Not Your
Mascots*](http://www.notyourmascots.org/), an organization dedicated to
the eradication of harmful native mascots.  Wise, who advocated changing
the team’s name while at the *Post*, also works with The Undefeated, a
web site under development that will explore the intersection of sports,
race and culture.

The forum is being organized by [*Rebrand Washington
Football*](http://www.rebrandwf.org/), a local grassroots organization
working to change the Washington football team’s name.  Contact
[*RebrandWF@gmail.com*](mailto:RebrandWF@gmail.com) for more
information.
