***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the February 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*The February 2014 Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/the-february-2014-washington-socialist/)

Tuesday, February 11th, 2014

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

Welcome to the February edition of the *Washington Socialist*, the
monthly newsletter of the DC Metro Democratic Socialists of America.
With DC’s primary season heating up, Bill Mosley has written a [*brief
guide*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=405c5459a7&e=003de9ccab)
to the unique politics of our nation’s capital and DSA’s endorsement
process. Be sure to read it, as we will be considering endorsements at
our next [*membership
meeting*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=aef1ed58ca&e=003de9ccab) on
February 8th at Cleveland Park Library!

Carolyn Byerly has written an [*insightful
piece*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=51eca951ec&e=003de9ccab)
on recent unemployment numbers that dives into the role of gender in
employment figures. The overall news is good for men and women but the
pay gap
[*persists*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=76ec7e5cf0&e=003de9ccab).

Victory! Kurt Stand
[*reports*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=4d6c9f1045&e=003de9ccab)
on the celebration of minimum wage increases in DC, Prince George’s and
Montgomery counties. As Kurt
[*notes*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6760702220&e=003de9ccab),
there are lessons to be learned as we push to build on these successes.

Worthwhile reads: Jose Gutierrez
[*reviews*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7a09a92030&e=003de9ccab)
Lane Kenworthy’s new book: *Social Democratic America. *Lane, Jose
writes, has outlined an ambitious program, more ambitious in scope that
that of almost any progressive politician. Read his detailed review
[*here*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8f030a6afc&e=003de9ccab).

Hope Village Exposed: Kurt Stand
[*exposes*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c6183196a7&e=003de9ccab)
the scarcity of job training and support for those who have paid their
debt to society, often many times over. This powerful call to action is
well worth the
[*read*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=63d65b81ba&e=003de9ccab).

Good Reads: DC DSAers
[*highlight*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=be2a546a71&e=003de9ccab)
some of their favorite articles of the month.

[*Good Reads*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads/)

Friday, January 31st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2014**

[*Whatever happened to the War on
Poverty?*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/05/business/50-years-later-war-on-poverty-is-a-mixed-bag.html?ref=business)
It’s been 50 years since LBJ’s declaration. The NYT’s Annie Lowrey runs
the numbers and the prospects in what will doubtless be one of many such
looks in the rear view mirror (and the crystal ball).

Metro DC Local co-chair Jose Gutierrez posted this one on our Facebook
page and it deserves the [*widest possible
circulation*](http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/five-economic-reforms-millennials-should-be-fighting-for-20140103).

Several takes on the National Security State: Tom Englehardt in
[**Common Dreams
**](http://www.commondreams.org/view/2014/01/06?fb_action_ids=10152513782729115&fb_action_types=og.likes) and
Dan Gillmor in [**The
Guardian**](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/05/new-years-resolution-stop-nsa-surveillance-state?CMP=ema_565),
making the crucial link between surveillance and the choking off of the
open Internet.

Sam Pizzigati’s “[*Too
Much*](http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html)” weekly blog provides
juicy stories of excess and the reaction against it, including the
“Petulant Plutocrat of the Week,” the latest example of someone who has
it all and wants… more.

[*Help or Hindrance, Hope or Hopelessness: Hope Village and Prison
Release*](http://dsadc.org/help-or-hindrance-hope-or-hopelessness-hope-village-and-prison-release/)

Friday, January 31st, 2014

*      The combined stealings and robberies of all the thieves and
highwaymen in the penitentiary at Atlanta would be but a trifle compared
to the loot of a single \[war\] profiteer and this explains why the
former are convicted felons and the latter eminent patriots and
philanthropists.  …*

*      If there is any one thing settled beyond question it is that the
criminal, so-called, is the product of society, and in caging him like a
beast, society in its blindness and brutality but bruises the body and
scars the soul of its ill-fated off-spring for punishment of its own
sins. *

*      In the nearly four years I spent among them as a fellow-convict I
came to know the inmates of prisons intimately enough to believe in them
as human beings; to be convinced that as a whole they are far more
sinned against than sinning, and to be willing to cast my lot with them
as against the social cruelty and misunderstanding of which they are
victims.*

*Eugene Victor Debs, *Walls & Bars*, Socialist Party Press, 1927 pp
238-239*

 

**Help or Hindrance, Hope or Hopelessness**

**Hope Village and Prison Release**

By Kurt Stand

The New Year is underway bringing with it new hope, even if that hope is
often fleeting.  For those in prison, this contrasts with the Christmas
season, a difficult time for many whether they celebrate the holiday or
not.  After all, it is a season of family togetherness and celebration,
something difficult or impossible to fully embrace when locked up. 
January 1, on the other hand, is a happier occasion.  No matter how long
the sentence (except for those subjected to life terms), it marks a step
in the journey home – “one year done, one less to do” is how the day is
commonly seen.  But the future, bright in the distance, can be a
challenging time the nearer that final night behind the fence arrives. 
Release along with high expectations, hope and happiness, can bring its
own tests – former prisoners must make their way with few resources when
they re-enter what is often a vastly changed world.  Without a strong
network of family and friends (family and friends who themselves are
able to provide help) it is an almost impossible challenge.  Halfway
houses exist to bridge that gap, to help prisoners with employment,
housing, medical and other needs as they cross the line between
incarceration and freedom.  At least they exist for that purpose in
theory; in practice they generally fall far short.  Washington DC’s Hope
Village, located in Southeast DC, provides a telling example of just how
far short they can fall.

Last year, the District of Columbia Corrections Information Council
(CIC) — established by the Revitalization Act of 1997 and the Jail
Improvement Act of 2003 — confirmed what those who experienced Hope
Village already knew.  In a report based on an inspection of conditions
at the facility as well as extensive interviews with residents, former
resident, family members and staff, one sentence stands out:

The CIC heard on multiple occasions that incarcerated DC residents would
prefer to stay at secure Bureau facilities than renter DC through Hope
Village.

Translated into English, that means people would rather be in prison
than stay in a halfway house that allows them to walk on city streets,
visit home, eat “real” food, and have a degree of freedom not possible
when locked up.  That feeling is widespread and has nothing to do with
nostalgia for prison, everything to do with how Hope Village
functions.   Findings included in the report may help explain why so
many feel that way:

DC residents are returning to the DC community after periods of
incarceration, and many have served long sentences and are disconnected
from their homes, families, loved ones, government, and local services.
Often DC residents in Bureau custody are incarcerated in states all over
the country, as far as California, Texas, Arizona, and Florida. Upon
return to the DC community, residents need assistance with employment,
housing, medical and mental healthcare, substance abuse, reintegration,
mentoring, therapy, identification, transportation, living necessities,
and more. All of these needs, if unmet, present significant challenges
to reentry.”

Detailing what that meant, the report provides documentation that
supports the following observations:

-   Some programs are offered at Hope Village; however, the quality of
    the programming is poor. Topics discussed in class are not related
    to the class (e.g. in Life Skills class, life skills are not
    discussed and residents do not learn anything; in drug programming
    many topics are discussed, none of which include drugs or drug use).
    The time spent and subjects discussed in programming do not further
    the goal of successful reentry.

<!-- -->

-   Residents feel unprepared to complete basic life tasks, such as
    taking the Metro or bus and navigating their way around the
    District, along with more complex tasks such as housing, employment
    and reentering a community they have been distanced from for an
    extended period of time.

<!-- -->

-   The vocational staff is not trained and lacks experience in
    employment assistance.

<!-- -->

-   The attitude of Hope Village staff is poor, providing punitive
    rather than supportive measures.

<!-- -->

-   Staff members lack training and competence to work with the
    ex-offender population.

<!-- -->

-   Staff does not offer enough support to residents at such a critical
    time in their lives to procure the most successful employment and
    life outcomes.

<!-- -->

-   Hope Village provides little or no assistance for residents seeking
    housing upon their release from the facility. Residents are often
    forced to reside in homeless shelters or on the street when they
    fail to receive such assistance.

 

To put a human face on this, I saw last autumn someone I knew in
prison walking the streets at Gallery Place, living in a homeless
shelter after 20 years of prison for street drug crimes that left him
locked up while in his 20s and 30s.  Still a young man, he has no job
skills, poor reading skills and few prospects.  Returning to a changed
city, his family now lives in PG County, the neighborhood where he grew
up no longer affordable.  Though nearby, it is another jurisdiction and
he would have to jump through bureaucratic hoops to get approval to live
there – and themselves stretched financially there was little concrete
help they could give.  Lacking a car, Metro being expensive, he could
see them only rarely.  Desperate for help, there was nothing real
offered by way of assistance before leaving prison, in the halfway
house, or now when back on the street.

Another man I knew, older, who had held jobs and is better able to
navigate through life, I saw working ripping out walls and pipes in a
building about to be renovated.  It was a temporary job that a friend
helped him find, one he was happy to do, but offering nothing long-term
or permanent.  Living with family members, he had a roof over his head
and was happy to be again a free man.  But he wanted a permanent job. 
While at Hope Village he was consistently asking for help –knowing that
it is hard for a semi-skilled laborer, 50 years old, with a history of
convictions, to land work.  The “booming” economy in DC is not for the
likes of people such as he.

A third person faced a different reality.  His younger brother is
mentally disabled, his mother suffers diabetes; he didn’t want to come
home to be a burden.  In his 30s, very determined and upbeat in life, he
managed to get a part-time retail job earning minimum wage.  He was
happy with the work, but it certainly didn’t allow him to rent an
apartment.  He too was caught in the gentrification change, his family
no longer living in the District.  So he was living in a shelter, trying
to maintain a positive outlook that enables him to see beyond
day-to-day.  He had tried to get housing assistance while at Hope
Village, the only help he received were empty words.  So today, he also
works at trying to maintain a positive outlook that goes beyond his
bleak day-to-day.

Others, of course, are doing better.  But generally in those cases they
had family and friendship networks with sufficient resources to help
them get a decent-paying full time job, to put a roof over their head,
and to re-enter life truly free rather than as a supplicant.  For them,
Hope Village wasn’t a help, it simply was less of a hindrance.  And even
then, other costs abound – for myself, it meant a delay in getting work,
a delay in being with family, a delay in restarting life – contrary to
expectations and contrary to what official policy is supposed to be. 
For those who are in Hope Village today, or who will be there in the
future, a different kind of re-entry program is needed.  As the CIC
report explains, the District government ought to increase funding for
employment and housing needs, mental and physical health provision,
transportation, supporting family and community reintegration because,
as the report says,

… Increased provision of these support services will lead to DC
residents spending less time incarcerated, overall safer communities,
and monetary savings.

But those changes won’t happen without pressure, without public concern
and demand.  At the end of last year, the Community Lawyering Project at
Bread for the City, together with other organizations concerned about
the rights and well being of people returning home after prison, called
for a congressional hearing and town hall meetings to discuss the CIC
Report and the beginning of a broad public discussion of how to
implement its recommendations.  Now, as we enter election season, these
concerns need to be voiced loudly and insistently in the interests of
justice and equity. For the essence of labor and socialist principles
can be simply stated: all of us or none.

 

All quotes are from:

[*District of Columbia Corrections Information Council (CIC)
comprehensive report on conditions at the Hope Village Residential
Reentry
Center*](https://sites.google.com/a/dc.gov/cic/announcements/cichopevillagereportmay2013),
May 14, 2013, Michelle R. Bonner, Chair Katharine A. Huffman Reverend
Samuel Whittaker

Information on the Petition can be found at:

“[*Bring Hope to Hope
Village*](http://www.change.org/petitions/bring-hope-to-hope-village),”
Petition by Aja Taylor, posted by Community Lawyering Project, Bread for
the City, December 2, 2013

[*Metro-DC DSA to Consider Endorsements in DC Primary
Election*](http://dsadc.org/metro-dc-dsa-to-consider-endorsements-in-dc-primary-election/)

Friday, January 31st, 2014

By Bill Mosley

At its meeting on Saturday, Feb. 8, Metro-DC Democratic Socialists of
America will consider endorsing candidates in the April 1 District of
Columbia primary election.

The meeting will take place from 2:30-3:30 pm at the Cleveland Park
Library, 3310 Connecticut Ave. NW, near the Cleveland Park Metro
station.

Primaries are being held by the Democratic, Republican, Statehood Green,
and Libertarian parties.  Offices on the ballot are mayor; council
chairman; at-large councilmember; councilmembers for Wards 1, 3, 5 and
6; delegate to the U.S. House of Representatives; U.S. senator; U.S.
representative; and, for voters in the Democratic primary, members of
the Democratic national and state committees.  (The delegate to the U.S.
House, a salaried position that dates back to the early 1970s, is the
official representative of D.C.’s interests in Congress.  The delegate,
currently Eleanor Holmes Norton, serves on committees and can speak, but
not vote, on the House floor.  The unpaid positions of U.S. senator and
representative were created in the early 1990s to serve as lobbyists for
D.C. statehood.  Sometimes known as “shadow” members, they are not
recognized by Congress and don’t serve on committees or have speaking or
voting rights).

At the meeting, Metro-DC DSA will consider motions for endorsements to
any of these offices.  Any local DSA member in good standing in the
organization – i.e., having paid dues within the past year – is eligible
to propose and vote on endorsements.  According to Metro-DC DSA’s
bylaws, decisions on electoral endorsements require a vote of two-thirds
of the members present.

My article from last month’s *Washington Socialist* discussing the race
for D.C. mayor is available at [*this
link*](http://dsadc.org/dc-mayors-race-crowded-field-limited-choices/).

[*Minimum Wage Victory Rally: Turning Setbacks Into
Opportunity*](http://dsadc.org/minimum-wage-victory-rally-turning-setbacks-into-opportunity/)

Friday, January 31st, 2014

By Kurt Stand

“Yes, we can” – “Si se Puede” has been the slogan of union and reform
movements from the early days of the United Farm Workers union on
through Barak Obama’s first presidential campaign.  Joslyn Williams,
president of the AFL-CIO Metropolitan Washington Labor Council, opened a
Wednesday, January 15 celebration of the minimum wage hike victories in
DC, Prince Georges and Montgomery counties, by changing the phrase,
leading a chant “Yes, we did.”  Good spirits were everywhere in evidence
during the reception and the subsequent speech-making in the lobby of
the AFL-CIO building as victories for working people – especially those
which translate into real and immediate gains for many who are in need –
are rare enough.  But not too rare was the hope of the crowd; cheers
rang out with calls for support to press the campaign to extend the
increase to the entire state of Maryland, to bring the campaign to
Virginia.

Hopes for further wins are not idle.   The success just gained points
the way for other campaigns as it entailed turning a defeat into
victory, turning a geographically limited initiative into a broader
regional movement.  The story of the initial setback should be
well-known.  Last year, an apparently victorious campaign to increase
the minimum wage at big-box stores –specifically Walmart – was defeated
when the Washington, DC government was confronted by the power of fear.
  Walmart, ignoring the reality that its business model is based on
low-wage labor, objected to the plan on the basis that it shouldn’t be
singled out for special, “unfair” treatment.  Leaving aside the peculiar
understanding of what constitutes “fair play” for a billio- dollar
corporation that uses its market strength to undermine pay standards,
some local political and business leaders were willing to buy the
argument.  Most were not, and thus, added to argument was the use of raw
power.  Wielding as a club the high rate of unemployment among District
residents who are not benefitting from local gentrification, Walmart
threatened to stop its planned opening of new outlets in the city if the
proposal became law.  Mayor Vincent Gray surrendered to that pressure,
vetoed the bill, as did enough Council members such that the veto could
not be overridden.  But that was not the end of the story.

DC City Council Chair Phil Mendelson explained to the gathering what
happened next.   Rather than accept corporate blackmail as a final
answer, the Council took Walmart at its word and decided that the
company would not be “singled out.”  Instead of legislation limited to
big box stores, Mendelson proposed a measure for an across-the-board
minimum wage hike.  Now Walmart would simply have to pay the same
increased minimum as all retail and other low-wage employers.  And this
time the Council approved the measure with a veto-proof unanimous vote.

That unanimity was strengthened by the fact that suburban Maryland acted
in concert with DC.  Marc Elrich, Montgomery County Council Member at
Large, explained how that happened.  When he initially introduced local
minimum wage hike legislation, the business community responded by
claiming it was unfair to them for an increase to take place only in
Montgomery County, implying that businesses might move out (the concept
of “fair,” evidently not including workers interests).  Elrich responded
to that threat by reaching out to Mendelson and to other legislators in
DC and Prince Georges, with the proposal that they introduce matching
bills.  By establishing the same increase in all three jurisdictional
lines, employers could not so easily threaten to cross a street in order
to higher lower-paid  labor.  Again, it was the ability to broaden the
scope of the legislation that enabled progress to be made against
corporate strategy to divide workers against each other.  Expanding the
range of progressive change, the blackmail failed — Walmart did not stop
its expansion plans, nor did it or any other business move in
consequence.

Important and vital as was legislative action, even more critical to the
success won was pressure from the streets – it is hard to imagine the
current momentum toward a minimum wage increase without the recent
demonstrations, one-day strikes and rallies by Walmart and fast food
workers across the nation.  Williams in his opening comments emphasized
the importance of mass pressure through coalition efforts as being
responsible for the victories being celebrated.  As he called out the
names of coalition partners active in this victory, the applause and
cheers given to each – Respect DC, DC Employment Justice Center, Jews
United For Justice, Faith Strategies, DC Fiscal Policy Institute, DC
Jobs with Justice, Casa De Maryland, Restaurant Opportunities
Centers-DC, Progressive Maryland & PG NAACP – was a sign that the unity
established with the Metro DC Labor Council can have lasting meaning in
overcoming parochial divides which in the past divided workers living in
different parts of the region.

Elizabeth Shuler, National AFL-CIO Secretary-Treasurer, underscored the
potential of that unity when she told the gathering that the successful
campaign for a regional minimum wage was going to be used as a model for
similar initiatives throughout the country.  And, she added that unity
of action built in the Metro DC area will be replicated in other regions
through a new national community-labor-coalition – its formation first
announced at his celebration.

Meanwhile, plans are underway to maintain this unity and build upon this
victory in our area.  As noted above, approval was shouted out for calls
to bring the campaign for a minimum wage increase to Annapolis so that
suburban Maryland’s gains can be spread throughout the state – and to
take the fight to Richmond and win a similar raise for Virginia’s
low-paid workers.  And not to be forgotten is the campaign to raise the
pay for tipped workers who can still, legally, be paid as little as
\$2.13 per hour.

Beyond that we need fair wages and jobs for all, a need Elrich stressed
in his comments.  So too did National AFL-CIO Executive Vice President
Tefere Gebre, an immigrant from Ethiopia, who spoke of the meaning of
the American Dream as a struggle for social justice for all.  It is that
struggle which calls to all of us to turn Si se Puede into a continuing
triumphs for working people so that many more “yes we did” victories can
be celebrated.

[*Review of Social Democratic America by Lane
Kenworthy*](http://dsadc.org/review-of-social-democratic-america-by-lane-kenworthy/)

Friday, January 31st, 2014

By Jose Gutierrez

In *Social Democratic America*, Lane Kenworthy outlines an ambitious
program, more ambitious in scope than that of almost any progressive
politician.

Kenworthy suggests that the amount that the US spends on social
insurance programs should increase by 10% of GDP, which would be equal
to \$1.5 trillion. He believes that through a kind of policy drift all
of the rich countries have expanded their social insurance systems and
that this dynamic is also taking place in the United States.

Kenworthy mentions as evidence for his argument the creation and
expansion of several programs since the 1970’s including:

\* Expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit in 1986, 1990, 1993 and
2009.

\* Medicaid expansions in 1984-1988, 1998 and most recently in 2010.

\* Medicare prescription drug bill, 2004.

\* Creation and expansion of Child Tax Credit, 1997 and 2003.

\* Expansion of Head Start 1984, 1990, 1995, 2009.

\* Increase in disability benefits and expansion of access

\* Low-Income energy assistance, created in 1981

\* Public funding of after school activities in schools in low-income
communities.

 

The major exception to his argument, which he mentions in his book, is
Aid to Families with Dependent Children.

He believes that once a program is created it is difficult to eliminate
that program.

Kenworthy suggests that reforms will come piecemeal and not all at once.
His comprehensive list of reforms include:

-   Universal health insurance

-   Universal system of one year of paid parental leave

-   Universal early education

-   Increased Child Tax Credit

-   Universal sickness insurance

-   Eased eligibility criteria for unemployment insurance

-   Wage insurance for unexpected drops in income

-   State-run supplemental defined-contribution pension plans with
    automatic enrollment

-   Extensive, personalized job search and (re)training support

-   Government as employer of last resort

-   Minimum wage increased modestly and indexed to inflation

-   Earned Income Tax Credit extended farther up the income ladder and
    indexed to average wages or GDP per capita

-   Higher benefit level for social assistance (i.e. TANF-like programs)

-   Reduced incarceration of low-level drug offenders

-   Affirmative action shifted to focus on family background rather than
    race

-   Expanded government investment in infrastructure and public spaces

-   More paid holidays and vacation time

 

Kenworthy mentions the idea of government as employer of last resort,
which is the most popular of the five suggestions made by Jesse Myerson
in his piece for [*Rolling
Stone*](http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/five-economic-reforms-millennials-should-be-fighting-for-20140103).

There is also some overlap between his proposal and the [*social and
economic bill of
rights*](http://www.dsausa.org/a_social_and_economic_bill_of_rights) proposed
by [*Democratic Socialists of America*](http://www.dsausa.org/).

He proposes that this agenda be funded by the following revenue
increases:

-   Value Added Tax of 12% (5.0% of GDP)

-   Return to 2000 federal income tax rates (2.0% of GDP)

-   New tax brackets at the top of the income distribution (0.7%)

-   Elimination of the mortgage interest tax deduction (0.6%)

-   Carbon tax (0.7%)

-   Financial transactions tax of 0.5% on trades (0.5%)

-   Increase the payroll tax cap so that it covers 90% of
    earnings (0.2%)

-   Increase the payroll tax by 1 percentage point (0.3%)

 

Kenworthy is pessimistic about the prospects of a revitalized labor
movement. He also doesn’t think it’s necessary to achieve the goals
outlined in his book.

While it is not surprising that any progressive would feel that way, it
is surprising that he thinks the goals he outlines are achievable
without the support of a dynamic grassroots movement. A welfare state of
the scope he describes has been achieved only in countries with powerful
labor movements and strong socialists or social democratic parties.

He also doesn’t think that major changes to the trade policy of the US
are called for. He is not very optimistic about the US adopting a
full-employment policy, which again, seems to contradict the fact that
he is in favor of government being an employer of last resort.

There are some proposals in the book that would be difficult for many to
embrace.

His proposal for a Value Added Tax, which is a type of consumption tax,
would be one example, even though, as he points out, there is no country
with a large social insurance system that doesn’t have one.

Kenworthy also never discusses the need for worker control that would
increase the likelihood that these reforms would not be reversed at a
later time.

Still, it is a worthwhile book. At the very least the agenda mentioned
by the writer would constitute a consensus position of immediate reforms
for the American left.

For additional perspectives on the book and related topics:

1. [*Interview with
writer*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/01/09/this-sociologist-has-a-plan-to-make-america-more-like-sweden/)

2. [*Liberal critique of
book*](http://thinkprogress.org/economy/2014/01/24/3199891/kenworthy-social-democracy/)

3. [*Socialist
critique*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2013/08/social-democracy-for-our-time/)

4. [*How a more developed  Welfare State could lead to a more radical
change in the United
States*](https://inthesetimes.com/article/13998/the_welfare_state_of_america/)

[*Women’s Paid Unemployment Rate
Falling*](http://dsadc.org/womens-paid-unemployment-rate-falling/)

Friday, January 31st, 2014

Carolyn M. Byerly

Women’s paid employment is not only bouncing back from the 2007-08
financial crash, but is higher than at any time in US history, according
to a December 6 report from the [*Institute for Women’s Policy
Research*](http://dsadc.org/2014/01/www.iwpr.org).  The report said job
growth for both women and men is in major recovery mode.  The [*IWPR
report*](http://tiny.cc/NovemberJobs) was based on an analysis of U.S.
Bureau Labor Statistics from November 2013.

The government stats showed women gained the most jobs in education and
health services (39,000), professional and business services (17,000),
and retail trade (15,600).  Even though women’s unemployment figures of
6.7 percent are lower than men’s 7.3, men still hold more paid jobs than
women overall, the IWPR report said.  Even more important, when the
women’s figures are disaggregated, single mothers’ unemployment rate is
the highest of all at 9.7 percent.

These are important stats to consider, but they are incomplete, of
course.  The government’s unemployment data don’t include people who
have been without jobs for long periods of time, the chronically
unemployed.  This means that the outlook for women could actually be
even grimmer than the IWPR’s analysis found.  Moreover, in other recent
research, the IWPR has found that the wage gap between men and women is
not likely to close until 2058.  In other words, women will not see
equal pay during their working lives.

The IWPR, based in Washington, DC, was founded by Dr. Heidi Hartmann, a
socialist feminist economist, in 1987.
