***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from February 2016 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[Welcome to the February 2016 Issue of the Washington
Socialist](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-february-2016-issue-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Tuesday, February 2nd, 2016

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.127083333333333in"
height="0.7819444444444444in"}

**Welcome to the February 2016 issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
free monthly email newsletter of the Metro DC local of Democratic
Socialists of America.**

 

It’s a pretty full issue because it has to last through February 29.
Leap Year, y’know, meaning a presidential election cycle. Maybe you
heard something about that.

In fact, our February newsletter is launched in the early morning of the
first day something is actually happening in the 2016 campaign,
impromptu gatherings in Iowa that have been the focus of much attention
and activity. The candidates and tendencies engaged in that
demographically unrepresentative US state are carving out communities to
act on their behalf, in Iowa and after. And we know that the cozy term
“community” most often defines a group not only by what actually
characterizes it — practices and similarities — but by who gets
excluded, who gets “Otherized.”

This election cycle has featured the rhetoric of exclusion perhaps as
much as any in memory, so it is gratifying for we socialists, who
believe our concept of community is inclusive and humane, that some
parts of the discourse of this election are pushing back on those terms.
This issue of the newsletter has a strong focus on inclusion and its
virtues, and on how much we have to learn anew, every day.

**ON THE AGENDA:**\
An [**Iowa Caucus Results Watch
Party**](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=dea4a5e968&e=8fd40e373a)
is being sponsored the evening of Feb. 1, 9 to 11, by the independent
group DC for Bernie at, appropriately, the Marx Cafe, 3203 Mt. Pleasant
St. NW in D.C.

The [**Socialist Book
Group**](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=51d26fd88d&e=8fd40e373a)
meets Sunday,  Feb. 7 to discuss Polanyi’s classic, *The Great
Transformation* from 3-5 at the Kogod Courtyard inside the National
Portrait Gallery, 8th and F Streets (Gallery Place).

Metro DC DSA members and other Bernie Sanders advocates will be flyering
the first weekend of February, Saturday Feb. 6 at the Columbia Heights
Metro station from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. and at the Silver Spring Metro
Station on Sunday, Feb. 7 from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. You can find out more
on our [Meetup page
entry](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=a2a840c332&e=8fd40e373a)
about the event. Check our Meetup page periodically for further
announced opportunities for this kind of socialist political work.

Metro DC DSA’s [Monthly Membership
Meeting](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c26c7dc71b&e=8fd40e373a)
is Sunday, Feb. 14 at at the Cleveland Park branch library, 3310
Connecticut Ave. NW, at 2:30. The Steering Committee meets prior to the
membership meeting, at 1:30. THIS IS A CHANGE from the original
newsletter location, though the date remains the same.

***Because all these events are subject to change, our*** [***Meetup
page***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=4cf790d06b&e=8fd40e373a)
***is the best place to stay current.***

**ALSO**: Our allies at Jobs with Justice are bringing their [national
conference](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ccfbc7b3bf&e=8fd40e373a)
to DC in mid-February (the 12^th^ and 13^th^)

**IN THIS ISSUE**\
Metro DC DSA members were in the vanguard, excuse the expression, of the
March for Bernie Jan. 30 that stepped off in Lafayette Park that
Saturday afternoon, sunny but brisk. [See photos and
text](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=a4a7784858&e=8fd40e373a)\
Racism and the work of countering it has been in the forefront of Metro
DC DSA’s concerns, accentuated by the violent events of 2015 and the
struggle of the Sanders campaign to deal with it programmatically as
well. Bill Fletcher Jr., who has worked and strategized in this since
well before his work on the Jesse Jackson campaigns, brought history and
analysis to the Socialist Salon in January. Participants in that
wide-ranging discussion recount the details of Fletcher’s talk and
responses to questions. [Read complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=608dbdbaea&e=8fd40e373a)

Being an historically (though certainly not intentionally)
majority-white organization that allies itself with the struggles of
people of color, DSA is in a constant process of internal education.
Ingrid Goldstrom outlines the counsel that members of those
organizations offer to white allies – uncomfortable or not. [Read
complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c0462598eb&e=8fd40e373a)

The tally of dos and don’ts from an allies organization capsulizes the
“rules of the road” when working with other groups on antiracist
projects. [Read complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=9c73587f84&e=8fd40e373a)

In a related article, Goldstrom outlines the scope of work against
Islamophobia and actions in Maryland that are happening now. [Read
complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=047801f0f3&e=8fd40e373a)

The District of Columbia and its environs are getting short-changed
every time we turn around, but two recent events are particularly
stinging. Walmart, which connived its way into the juiciest areas of the
DC market with a promise to bring its stores and employment to some of
the city’s hardest-hit communities, has now reversed itself and canceled
plans to include those (no doubt less lucrative) communities. And the
city, which got none of those gaudy promises in writing, is stuck with
no recourse. Bill Mosley anatomizes the Walmart betrayal. [Read complete
article.](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=68f226d347&e=8fd40e373a)

Howard University’s public television station, WHUT, has nourished the
metro area for many years, often with programming that can’t be found on
other local PBS stations. The heavy bidding for spectrum space by big
telecom companies has apparently been too tempting for Howard’s
administrators, who appear to have put the station’s space in the
bandwidth on auction with the FCC, Carolyn Byerly relates. [Read
complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=87e6633dff&e=8fd40e373a)

In some good news, a potential loss of nearly 700 Prince George’s County
jobs in Safeway distribution centers was averted, mostly by resolute and
methodical union action. Support from the community and local officials
also helped win a privatization fight brought on by invasive hedge-fund
thinking, as Kurt Stand details. [Read complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=303fb74224&e=8fd40e373a)

The struggle for women’s reproductive rights takes different forms and
has different levels of intensity in our three jurisdictions – Maryland,
Virginia and the District. But as veteran activists outlined for our
January membership meeting, each locale has its own pesky problems.
Merrill Miller recounts the discussion. [Read complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=91a38c847b&e=8fd40e373a)

There is a great deal that can be done to reduce the global carbon
footprint by better control of methane escaping from extraction and
application, Bill Boteler explains. But the infamous, uncontrolled
methane leak in California’s Porter Ranch wellhead shows how the worst
effects of cost-cutting and slipshod energy management can emerge at any
time to send the whole effort tumbling backward. [Read complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=049b970495&e=8fd40e373a)

“Socialism in our time” is more often spoken with an ironic twist by
many of us than with any real hope of seeing the goal reached in our
lifetime (despite the astonishing evolution of discourse brought on by,
or illuminated by, the Sanders campaign). Maybe you don’t personally
have high expectations of living to see our particular millennium, but
does that mean you won’t care about what the planet looks like absent
you? The DSA national office has some thought-experiments for you. [Read
complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=682c1da5f7&e=8fd40e373a)

The Maryland General Assembly is, like the rest of us, shoveling out and
working to keep to its schedule. Woody Woodruff checks off some of the
progressive concerns that are in play as the legislators head toward
their mid-April adjournment. [Read complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=54f5c64fed&e=8fd40e373a)

Automation has been bringing big changes to the conditions and
availability of work since the beginning of the industrial revolution,
but the effects of today’s advances on tomorrow’s workforce could be
really, really drastic. Andy Feeney reviews a book about robots and
their role in our future. [Read complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=341d99a6ce&e=8fd40e373a).

Starting with a strong list of grownup readings for Black History Month,
our “Good Reads” bring you articles you may have missed.[ Read complete
article](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=286c551127&e=8fd40e373a)

Y**ou can read these and other past articles in the *Washington
Socialist* on our website where they are archived,**
[**dsadc.org**](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6f97d6cde7&e=8fd40e373a)

 

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
<woodlanham@gmail.com>.

[*BILL FLETCHER BRINGS HISTORY AND ANALYSIS TO THE RACE/CLASS
TANGLE*](http://dsadc.org/bill-fletcher-brings-history-and-analysis-to-the-raceclass-tangle/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Veteran activist and author Bill Fletcher Jr., believes the Bernie
Sanders campaign needs to “expand its narrative” to include concerns and
question of potential supporters beyond his largely white base and
beyond the perspective of his hero, the socialist Eugene Debs, that “if
you solve capitalism you’ve solved it all.”

Fletcher shared his ideas on building a new, broad Left coalition at the
Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America’s Socialist Salon Jan. 28.
Fletcher, a labor strategist and theoretician with deep experience in
the Jesse Jackson presidential campaigns of the 1980s, spoke to a packed
dining room of nearly 40 about the prospects for a left electoral
strategy that addresses the immediate opportunity of the Sanders
campaign but has a long-game strategy as well to match the right wing’s
successful movement-building approach.

“Here we go again on the left—we have nothing that resembles an
electoral strategy,” Fletcher began. He described a cycle in which left
activists work on electoral campaigns and are so alienated by the
process that they immediately drop out of electoral work until the next
cycle four years later, starting all over again.

Fletcher compared the well-documented ground-game strategy of the right
beginning with Richard Viguerie’s direct-mail campaigns in the 1960s
after the smashing defeat of GOP presidential candidate Barry Goldwater,
building state-level organizations aiming “to reverse the 20^th^
century.” Viguerie’s approach to organizing also contributed to
coalescing the conservative base that would elect Ronald Reagan in 1980.

In contrast, for left activists electoral politics were felt to be
“insufficiently revolutionary,” Fletcher recalled, with the exception of
the black electoral effort in the decades following the civil rights era
of the 1960s and ‘70s leading to the Jackson campaign, which was
specific and had a city by city movement-building approach.

The right had an issue focus that allowed them to use guns and abortion,
e.g., to capture non-urban areas and large sections of the white working
class “to build a total reactionary movement.” Unlike the left, they
didn’t expect total agreement ie: gun lobby supports might not be
anti-choice, anti-choice activists were expected to demonstrate for the
Second Amendment.  But the right did create a narrative around which
they could mobilize their otherwise disparate base.

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.1256944444444446in"
height="1.7604166666666667in"}

Fletcher called right-wing populism “the herpes of politics” because it
plays on elements endemic in the political system and erupts every time
the system becomes compromised – whenever anxieties arise the theme
(“narrative”) is the victimization of whites.

Fletcher anatomized the mistakes of the left, playing out again in this
electoral cycle:

The Sanders campaign, he said, is creating a “narrow narrative” compared
to the more inclusive Jackson campaigns. For example, Sanders’ campaign
doesn’t reach important constituencies that it could and “doesn’t
include the questions that many people are seeking the answers to – it’s
not the full picture.” Though supporters often argue that it is a
groundbreaking assault on inequalities in the capitalist system, Bernie
is “dizzy with success” and doesn’t realize that doing better than
expected is still not doing everything he can.

Fletcher faulted Sanders for being in elective office for several
decades but doing little to try and use his position to mobilize a broad
social movement to bring the Left back into electoral politics.
Additionally, he pointed to Sanders’ lack of effort to address problems
of racism and sexism that cannot be explained by economics alone.

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="3.1256944444444446in"
height="1.7604166666666667in"}

Sanders’ campaign references both “racist oppression and capitalist
exploitation” but “some populations are way worse off \[in this
equation\] and need more help,” Fletcher argued. Sanders talks about
jobs and rebuilding the middle class, Fletcher said, but “when another
policeman kills a black person, Sanders seems unable to connect the
issues or address the underlying racism that still exists in the
country.”

Jackson got wild approval from white farmers and workers because he
could connect their lives and issues to the broader narrative. Unlike
Jackson, Sanders is not seen as “their champion” by people who are
unlike him. Sanders is an inspirational “leader” but “we need an
organizer” as well, Fletcher said.

Sanders’s veneration of Eugene Debs is telling, Fletcher said. “Debs was
a complicated man and the Socialist Party was \[a\] complicated”
political formation in Debs’ day. And Debs believed “philosophically
that if you solve capitalism you solve it all.” In fact there are no
“common economic demands” that can unify people across race lines,
Fletcher declared.

In an article posted in August 2015 on national DSA’s [**Democratic
Left**](http://www.dsausa.org/democratic_left) blog, Fletcher declared:
“The sort of “political revolution” that the Sanders Campaign proclaims
has been a long time coming. Yet it will never arrive if there is not a
full recognition that the class struggle overlaps that of racial
justice. The ruling elites, for several centuries, have appreciated that
race is the trip wire of U.S. politics and social movements. When will
progressives arrive at the same conclusion?”

Fletcher reflected on his early days in 1960s-‘70s politics when he
opted out of electoral politics, thinking they were irrelevant. He has
come to a different place after years of working in grassroots campaigns
and realizing that change can only come systematically through regular
involvement in the political process.

Among questions addressed to Fletcher after his formal talk, one queried
whether left activists should work with Democrats or seek an independent
electoral strategy. Fletcher recommends an inside-outside strategy,
because the “two-party grip” on US politics “makes it hard for a third
party to emerge.” Within this strategy for the immediate campaign,
Sanders’ narrative has to expand. Fletcher said dismissively that “these
sectarian debates \[about the Democratic Party\] are not worth having
any more.” Activists in this cause “don’t have to agree on everything …
let’s just get people together who aren’t going to shoot at each other.
… We are the left that is interested in electoral politics –even though
we hate it.”

Fletcher advocates, instead, assembling a leadership whose members can
find common ground on a few key issues and outline a strategy to address
them. He favors local action to get progressive candidates onto school
boards, city councils, and into state legislatures – “I want us to take
over Texas, take over Alabama,” he said. “The right wing has been able
to convince people in places like that that the Koch brothers are their
friends” when this thinking really backfires on them.

Why has labor – where Fletcher has been engaged as a rank-and-file
activist, educator and strategist much of his life– become so weak?
Fletcher responded with history: “Labor was devastated” by the
Taft-Hartley Act’s restrictions on organizing and by the Cold War
anticommunism that stripped activists out of the union movement and
reinforced Gompers-style business unionism. Coupled with the radical
changes in the economy of the 70s that diverted more and more resources
away from workers and into financial capitalism, the effect has been
like the frog in a pot who is brought to boil incrementally without
noticing his own demise.

Asked about remedies for the right’s dominance at the state and
congressional level, Fletcher counseled left unity on a scale well
beyond temporary alliances created by Sanders’s advocacy of democratic
socialism. Somebody, he said, “has to call a meeting” to build a real
bloc for a city by city left campaign to disrupt the right’s well
organized and well financed grip by striking at the heart of its power.
In trying to build a bloc, he said, who gets to be at the table is more
important than who calls the meeting. Fletcher’s book [**Solidarity
Divided**](https://books.google.com/books/about/Solidarity_Divided.html?id=At048traA3IC&source=kp_cover)
expands on some of those themes.

Fletcher argued for a continued electoral strategy, a “long game” to
match that of the right. He acknowledged that the chance for
cross-racial unity was complicated by an “anarcho-reformist” strain
within some recent, youth-driven movements like Black Lives Matter. The
strategy as he described it was to engage instead in street actions that
would “force elites to do what we want them to do.” BLM is resistant to
talking about class because “it is a way of obscuring race” as a salient
issue.

For more of Fletcher’s views, check out his website
[*http://billfletcherjr.com/*](http://billfletcherjr.com/) or tune into
Arise, his weekly radio program on labor issues (WPFW – 89.3 FM – Friday
mornings at 9 a.m.

*Carolyn Byerly and Kurt Stand contributed to this article.*

*The Socialist Salon of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America meets
monthly over dinner to hear and discuss issues of socialist politics and
analysis. Our February Salon will address Socialist-Feminism; details
will be on DSA’s* [**Meetup page**](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/)
*which always previews our upcoming events.*

[Fighting the Current Scourge of
Islamophobia](http://dsadc.org/fighting-the-current-scourge-of-islamophobia/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*By Ingrid Goldstrom*

Rising violence against Muslims, Arabs, South Asians and Sikhs as well
as concerted efforts to halt the acceptance of Syrian and other refugees
fleeing the Middle East demand that all people of good will, especially
socialists and other progressives, raise their voices against anti-Arab
racism and Islamophobia.

One national organization ([Showing Up for Racial
Justice](http://www.showingupforracialjustice.org/), or SURJ) and one
statewide group focusing on the plight of Syrian refugees in particular
([Maryland for Refugees](http://www.md4refugees.org/)) provide tools and
serve as shining examples of just how to go about this. With just a few
moments of our time, we can make a huge difference.

At the national level, SURJ ([see related
article](http://dsadc.org/moving-toward-walking-the-walk-allies-in-the-fights-against-violence-injustice-and-intolerance/))
provides tools for organizations and individuals to support Muslims,
Arabs, South Asians and Sikhs, especially critical since their
communities have been traumatized by events in the wake of the San
Bernadino shooting and the vitriol spewed by the Republican Party
candidates for President. Simple actions that we can take to show our
support include the following: displaying yard signs of [support for
Muslim
neighbors](http://www.showingupforracialjustice.org/muslim_yard_signs);
writing op-eds for local papers; sponsoring letter parties where
attendees write letters of support and deliver them to their local
mosques; wearing buttons expressing support (DSA buttons are available
at
[www.dsausa.org](http://dsadc.org/fighting-the-current-scourge-of-islamophobia/www.dsausa.org));
taking photos of DSA locals holding supportive signs such as “We Stand
with Our Muslim Neighbors” and posting these on social media; and
holding conversations at membership meetings/salons, etc, addressing
Islamophobia. Simply smiling or engaging in chit-chat with women wearing
hijabs can go a long way in demonstrating our solidarity.

 

 

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="3.1256944444444446in"
height="2.3409722222222222in"}

*An impromptu group shot at the January Metro DC DSA membership
meeting.*

An ongoing and fast-building example of local actions is the coalition
of groups, including Peace Action and faith-based groups in Montgomery
County, Maryland, spurred to action by the Maryland Governor Hogan’s
(non-binding) rejection of Syrian refugees. The coalition quickly and
successfully moved progressive local city councils in Greenbelt, Takoma
Park and Rockville to introduce resolutions welcoming Syrian refugees.
Four members of the Prince George’s County Council have cosponsored a
similar resolution (which also opposes recent upticks in deportation of
Latinos) to be considered Feb. 2. A letter to Gov. Hogan opposing his
stance, initated by Takoma Park (Dist. 20) Sen. Jamie Raskin, had
accumulated signatures from five Maryland senators and eleven delegates.

The [coalition](http://www.md4refugees.org/) created a Facebook page
([Maryland Welcomes
Refugees](https://www.facebook.com/md4refugees/?fref=ts)), Twitter
account and listserv, developed welcoming signs for businesses to put in
their windows, sent a deluge of emails to state legislators, and
actively continue to find new ways to counter the harsh rhetoric of our
times.

*Lucy Duff contributed to this report.*

[Gas Leaks in Porter Ranch — and
DC](http://dsadc.org/gas-leaks-in-porter-ranch-and-dc/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*By Bill Boteler*

In 2012, a study published in *Science* put forward the idea that
cutting emissions of black carbon (soot) and methane could buy us time
in the effort to slow climate change while we are trying to phase out
fossil fuels. The study estimated that we could lower projected
temperatures in midcentury by 0.5 degrees C. Methane can trap 84 times
as much heat as CO2 in the first 20 years after it enters the
atmosphere. Sources include coal mines, fossil fuel producers and
landfills. Also, cattle production facilities and rice paddies
contribute as biological sources.

Cutting methane emissions is also cheaper and easier than replacing
fossil fuels, but sources are widespread and natural emission of methane
will increase as climate change warms permafrost in Arctic regions.

The [current natural gas leak at Porter Ranch,
California](http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-pol-ca-porter-ranch-senators-review-20160129-story.html)
is a dramatic example of how serious methane leaks can be and how
difficult methane leak reduction could be in a world of low-rent
capitalist management of energy resources. Erin Brockovich has compared
it to a BP Oil spill on land.

The leak was discovered at Southern California Gas Company’s Aliso
Canyon storage field in late October. This is an underground storage
facility created by capping a former natural gas well. Since its
discovery, the leak has spewed 84 million kilograms of methane. At its
peak, it was leaking 58,000 kil/hr but much more recently this was down
two-thirds to about 18,400 kil/hr.

The amount is equivalent to the greenhouse effect of 440,000 cars over a
one-year period. It is twice the annual greenhouse emissions of Los
Angeles, and, [according to
Counterpunch](http://www.counterpunch.org/2016/01/22/the-porter-ranch-gas-leak-blame-jerry-brown/),
it is thought fracking may have played a role in creating the leak.

Southern California Gas Company is digging a second well to reach and
cap the leak, which is 8,000 feet under the surface. But the leak
probably won’t be stopped until sometime in February, according to the
company’s claim. In the meantime, 26,000 families have fled from their
homes to escape the foul-smelling gas. Many have suffered nosebleeds,
headaches and respiratory distress.

Southern California Gas Company has had to pay Porter Ranch residents
for temporary housing in area hotels and residents’ lives have been
turned upside down. Real estate values and small businesses have been
adversely affected.

In respond to the state of emergency that Governor Jerry Brown finally
declared, the California Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources
has issued a notice to adopt emergency regulation for natural gas
storage facilities that would require ongoing monitoring. There are 330
such facilities in California alone, according to Counterpunch. But
Linda Caputo, an activist with 350.org, says the regulations need to be
“much tougher.” California’s two Senate members have most recently
called for a full-dress investigation by the Energy Department.

Leaky methane is a problem throughout the United States. As gas lines
age, our older cities, especially, are bleeding methane. A study
released in 2014 by researchers from Duke and Boston Universities found
5,893 natural gas leaks in the District of Columbia alone.

Cars carrying special monitors and GPS equipment covered 1,500 miles of
roads in DC. They produced maps showing the locations of leaks. They
also found leaks with high concentrations of methane and decided to
probe beneath manholes where they detected leaking. Twelve of these had
concentrations high enough to cause explosions. They reported these, but
to their dismay, on returning four months later, found that nine of
these were still emitting dangerous levels of gas. They also conducted a
survey in Boston and found a similar number of leaks per mile,
[according to USA
Today](http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/01/16/washington-dc-gas-pipeline-leaks/4497083/).

Older cities have pipes made of cast iron or steel that need replacing
with newer PVC pipes. The Duke study recommended that other cities
conduct gas leaks mapping.

U.S. Senator Edward Markey of Massachusetts has introduced legislation
to fund the replacement of leaking gas pipes nationwide. Also, President
Obama has just proposed new rules to regulate the release and flaring of
natural gas on public lands, according to the journal Oil and Gas
Investor.

It appears that after much pressure from activists and angry citizens,
combined with new research findings, the government is finally clamping
down on these sources of methane emissions. It remains to be seen how
this will affect fracking, which is a major source of methane leaks.

[*GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS &lt;&gt;FEBRUARY
2016*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-february-2016/)

Sunday, January 31st, 2016

GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

Welcome to February – a Leap Year, so one extra day for reading. We’ll
lead off with Kurt Stand’s **“Seven Suggestions for Black History
Month”**…

**One**: *A Future for Workers: A Contribution from Black Labor*, was
issued last year by the Black Labor Collaborative and the Coalition of
Black Trade Unionists to frame a discussion around building a
progressive agenda for the US labor movement that addresses economic
exploitation and racism.
[*http://www.cbtu.org/pdf/a\_future\_for\_workers.pdf*](http://www.cbtu.org/pdf/a_future_for_workers.pdf)

**Two:** *And Still I Rise: Black Women Labor Leaders
Voices/Power/Promise*, is a 2015 report – and an ongoing project of the
Institute of Policy Studies.  The report itself is based on wide-ranging
interviews with African American women union leaders and activists.

[*http://and-still-i-rise.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ASIR4\_21.pdf*](http://and-still-i-rise.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ASIR4_21.pdf)

**Three:** *\#Black Workers Matter: Organize the South*, is the
Conference Report from a two-day convening held in Raleigh, North
Carolina (Sept.14-15, 2015) on race and organizing.  Amongst the
featured speakers were Rev. Dr. William Barber, president of the North
Carolina NAACP and leader of the Moral Mondays movement, and Cecil
Roberts, president of the United Mine Workers of America.  The event was
sponsored by the Black Worker Initiative of the Institute for Policy
Studies.
[*http://www.ips-dc.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Black-Workers-Matter-online-version.pdf*](http://www.ips-dc.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Black-Workers-Matter-online-version.pdf)

** Four:** *The Moral Bankruptcy of Capitalism: The Black Radical
Tradition as Socialist Alternative*, was a conference held this year
(January 11) in Philadelphia.  Featured speakers included Cornel West,
Johanna Fernandez, Angela Davis, Vijay Prashad and many others.  The
Roar Collective posted videos of all conference sessions.
[*https://roarmag.org/2016/01/11/the-black-radical-tradition-in-our-time-conference-in-videos/*](https://roarmag.org/2016/01/11/the-black-radical-tradition-in-our-time-conference-in-videos/)

**Five:** *Struggle in Progress: Celebrating the 150^th^ Anniversary of
Union Victory and Emancipation*, is an issue of *Jacobin* (summer 2015),
that focuses on the revolutionary legacy of Reconstruction, and of
attempts in historiography, film and culture to erase its achievements
from our collective memory.
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/struggle-and-progress/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/issue/struggle-and-progress/)

**Six:** *UN Experts Catalog Seemingly Endless List of Racial
Discrimination in US* by Andrea Germanos, *Common Dreams* (1/29/16),
reports on a United Nations Working Group 11-day fact find trip which
took the delegation to Washington DC, Baltimore, Jackson (Miss.),
Chicago and New York City.  Chaired by Mireille Fanon Mendes France, the
group called upon the US government to establish a national human rights
commission, to pass pending criminal justice legislation and to ban the
death penalty across the nation.  A statement released by the group also
includes the following:  “Past injustices and crimes against African
Americans need to be addressed with reparatory justice.  A final report
will be presented to the UN’s Human Rights Council in September.
[*http://commondreams.org/news/2016/01/29/un-experts-catalog-seemingly-endless-list-racial-discrimination-us*](http://commondreams.org/news/2016/01/29/un-experts-catalog-seemingly-endless-list-racial-discrimination-us)

**Seven:** *Who Was W.E.B. DuBois?* by Nicholas Lemann, a review of
Kwame Anthony Appiah’s *Lines of Descent: W.E.B. DuBois and the
Emergence of Identity.*  A critical review of Appiah’s books that looks
at the relationship between DuBois’ view of race and racial identity,
Appiah’s concept of “cosmopolitanism,” and contemporary issues.  Lemann
writes:  “The killing of Michael Brown by a police officer in Ferguson,
Missouri, and the subsequent demonstrations, provided a vivid example of
the continuing need for a politics of racial protest, of the kind that
Du Bois engaged in for his whole life. Appiah is right that protest
against oppression is unnecessarily constricting if it’s the only
available form of racial identity, but it has to remain available as one
of the forms.” (*New York Review of Books*, 9/25/14).
[*http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2014/09/25/who-was-du-bois/*](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2014/09/25/who-was-du-bois/)

Some editors and interns at *The Atlantic* magazine talked to academic
and expert practicioners in banking and labor markets about what’s
currently awful and what might get better in 2016. Their answers ranged
from the USPS alt-banking scheme to better choices in the economics
Nobel Prize to financial services innovators opting for lower profits
per customer but a wider if less affluent customer base.
[*http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/01/hope-despair-banks-institutions/421779/*](http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/01/hope-despair-banks-institutions/421779/)

Maryland and other states that don’t have real public power companies
are trying to make it easy for alt-providers to access
competitively-priced power from renewable sources. This piece from
*Capital and Main* (via *Portside*) shows how hard that can be when big
corporate-owned power companies dominate the market. The subtext: Public
goods need public control, a lesson for Maryland and the region, which
is already dominated by Exelon and teetering on the brink of total
monopoly.
[*http://portside.org/2016-01-04/power-struggle-will-local-energy-groups-come-clean*](http://portside.org/2016-01-04/power-struggle-will-local-energy-groups-come-clean)

Thomas Edsall’s recent piece on the way right-wing forces and money have
taken over at the state and local level is also, crucially, about a
decline of the left’s capacity to engage and organize through
local-level institutions like clubs and societies, the old Tocqueville
standards – leaving a vacuum that the right has filled very effectively.
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/13/opinion/campaign-stops/the-republican-partys-50-state-solution.html?\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/13/opinion/campaign-stops/the-republican-partys-50-state-solution.html?_r=0)

Our record-breaking snowfall from which we are now emerging brings
questions about the increasing rate of weather catastrophes.
*Thinkprogress* examines the link between big storms and climate change
with several climate scientists, a piece written before the actual storm
arrived. It reminds us that climate change is a quintessentially
socialist issue; that mitigation of these effects can only come with
collective will and action because so much profit is pinned to the
status quo. First spotted in Sam Smith’s
[**Undernew**](http://prorevnews.blogspot.com/)*s*.

[*http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/01/22/3741287/climate-science-blizzards/*](http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/01/22/3741287/climate-science-blizzards/)

Speaking of snow, Kurt Stand sends more recommendations as a result of
being snowed in:

&gt;&gt;”The AFL-CIO has a new blog and the first installment is an
interview with Dan Savage (gay activist, sex advice copumnist) — it
makes one wish there was an afterlife, I love to think how much George
Meany would hate
this:[*https://medium.com/by-our-hands/a-sex-advice-columnist-says-unions-are-great-5dadcde7433e\#.xocmqbwj9*](https://medium.com/by-our-hands/a-sex-advice-columnist-says-unions-are-great-5dadcde7433e#.xocmqbwj9)

&gt;&gt;It turns out that Woody Guthrie lived in an apartment building
owned by Trump’s father in Brooklyn, and it turns out (no surprise) that
Trump the younger inherited his racism from his father.  *Portside* ran
an article about Guthrie’s encounter with Trump’s “white’s only” housing
policy:

[*http://portside.org/2016-01-22/what-woody-guthrie-wrote-about-old-man-trump-his-racist-landlord*](http://portside.org/2016-01-22/what-woody-guthrie-wrote-about-old-man-trump-his-racist-landlord)

&gt;&gt;”The UE adopted a resolution is support of BDS, after which an
Israeli law firm charged them with unfair labor practices (secondary
boycott), the NLRB upheld UE’s right to support the boycott.  The
article contains the resolution and explains the NLRB’s decision:
[*http://www.ueunion.org/ue-news/2016/ue-win-at-nlrb-harassing-political-charge-by-israeli-law-firm-dismissed*](http://www.ueunion.org/ue-news/2016/ue-win-at-nlrb-harassing-political-charge-by-israeli-law-firm-dismissed)

 

Louis Cooper recommends Matt Karp, “The Bernie Coalition,” Jacobin,
1/28/16
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/01/bernie-sanders-democratic-president-primary-new-hampshire-iowa-caucus/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/01/bernie-sanders-democratic-president-primary-new-hampshire-iowa-caucus/)

A ranking techo-skeptic, Evgeny Morozov observes in *The Guardian* how
some tech giants depend on fleecing the taxpayer for their prowess at
invading our lives and squashing competition: “With investors like
[*Google*](http://www.theguardian.com/technology/google), Amazon’s Jeff
Bezos and Goldman Sachs behind it, Uber is a perfect example of a
company whose global expansion has been facilitated by the inability of
governments to tax profits made by hi-tech and financial giants.”
[*http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/31/cheap-cab-ride-uber-true-cost-google-wealth-taxation*](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/31/cheap-cab-ride-uber-true-cost-google-wealth-taxation)

Bill Boteler (see his article in this issue) recommends this Common
Dreams report that describes the threat in continuing fossil fuel
development:
[*http://commondreams.org/news/2016/01/25/new-report-issues-dire-carbon-warning-keep-it-ground-or-else*](http://commondreams.org/news/2016/01/25/new-report-issues-dire-carbon-warning-keep-it-ground-or-else)

What are we really laughing at when we laugh at (or, guiltily, with)
Donald Trump. *The Nation*’s “Mad Law Professor” Patricia J. Williams
shows how devilishly skilled the GOP clown prince-in-waiting is at
bringing out the worst in anyone, all in the name of humorous “play.”
Suggested by our comrade Donna Hoffmeister.
[*http://www.thenation.com/article/cruelty-irony-and-evasion/*](http://www.thenation.com/article/cruelty-irony-and-evasion/)

[*Jobs Terminator 2*](http://dsadc.org/jobs-terminator-2/)

Sunday, January 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

Book review of Martin Ford, *Rise of the Robots: Technology and the
Threat of a Jobless Future* (Basic Books, New York, 2015), 334 pp.,
\$28.29 paperback.

*By Andy Feeney*

Job markets around the world still haven’t recovered completely from the
2007-8 financial crisis and the global recession that followed. But
judging from last month’s meeting of the World Economic Forum (WEF) in
Davos, Switzerland, another big shock to the international labor force
is due soon.

According to a WEF report issued in connection with this year’s Davos
gathering, a pending “Fourth Industrial Revolution” driven by robots,
online commerce, new advances in biotechnology and other disruptive
technologies is likely to eliminate roughly another 7 million jobs
worldwide between now and 2020. The same technically driven business
revolution should create another 2 million new jobs, chiefly in high
technology, for a net loss of 5 million jobs in the next half decade.

Technology-driven job losses for men and women will be approximately
equal in absolute terms, the WEF report predicts. Yet due to existing
gender imbalances in the most affected industries, women will lose five
jobs for every new one they gain while men will lose only three. In sum,
the Fourth Industrial Revolution will likely damage the employment
prospects of both men and women while further worsening existing gender
imbalances in the worldwide labor force. See
[*http://reports.weforum.org/future-of-jobs-2016/women-and-work-in-the-fourth-industrial-revolution/*](http://reports.weforum.org/future-of-jobs-2016/women-and-work-in-the-fourth-industrial-revolution/)
.

The WEF’s alarming predictions are consistent with what Martin Ford, a
long-time Silicon Valley entrepreneur with 25 years’ experience in
computer design and software development, has forecast for the global
job market in his new book *Rise of the Robots.* Ford devotes little
time to exploring the expected gender or racial impacts of the robotics
revolution – a real shortcoming in his book, compared to the WEF’s
report. But his overall analysis of what robotics, automation and
related technological developments should mean for working people is
even grimmer than the WEC’s, and yet in some ways, much more
interesting.

With his long experience in the computer and electronics industry, Ford
has detailed knowledge of some of the technological breakthroughs that
he sees as driving future employment impacts of potentially horrifying
dimensions. He likewise has clearly thought a lot about some big
economic trends that have shaped capitalist civilization since the first
Industrial Revolution, including the dramatic rise toward increased
income inequality that the United States and other rich western
societies have experienced over the past several decades.

By marrying his insight into new technological innovations, some of them
virtually unknown to the public, to his knowledge of broad economic
trends, Ford has produced a book that should be of equal interest to
computer geeks and labor economists. Unfortunately, its implications for
a large fraction of humanity both here in the US and in low-wage
developing economies overseas are frightening in the extreme, but at the
same time the scope and the technical intricacies of the automation
revolution we are undergoing are fascinating.

In the introduction to *Rise of the Robots*, Ford grounds his analysis
in Moore’s Law, the well-known idea in the computer field that for a
variety of reasons, the overall power of computers tends to double
approximately once in approximately every 18 months.

In the real world, Ford indicates, advances in microchip design,
software programs and other variables have in fact enabled computing
power to double some 27 times since the integrated circuit was invented
in 1958. Thanks to the magic of exponential growth, this means today’s
technology is about 134 million times as powerful as computers were back
in the early Sputnik age. This astonishing rate of progress in computer
capabilities has provided the platform for the advancement of the
robotics revolution, although the development of robots capable of
performing particular job categories has depended on sometimes quirky
circumstances.

Take for example Ford’s description of a robot recently designed by
engineers at Industrial Perception, Inc., a small startup company in
Silicon Valley, which has the ability to see well enough to stack,
restack and unstack different boxes in an industrial warehouse setting.

Before the invention of Industrial Perception’s warehouse robot, Ford
writes, there already were industrial robots employed in doing many
detailed manufacturing tasks, and some of these industrial robots had
visual abilities. Yet until recently even the sighted machines lacked
the capacity to see in three dimensions, and their inability to perceive
depth gave them a limited ability to function in settings that were “to
any meaningful degree unpredictable” – such as the selective stacking
and unstacking of differently sized and shaped boxes in warehouses, for
example. The result has been that in most warehouse settings, and in
some other industrial settings as well, certain tasks have been kept
open for human beings.

In 2006, however, the toymaker Nintendo introduced its innovative Wii
game console, which included a wireless wand containing a new
motion-detecting device called an accelerometer. An accelerometer, as it
happens, is a device that can detect motion in three dimensions. Sony
Corporation, a rival to Nintendo in the game market, then introduced its
own motion-detecting wand in its popular PlayStations. Microsoft, a
rival to both Sony and Nintendo in the game market, then leapfrogged its
competitors by adding a feature to its Xbox 360 game console that uses
infrared technology to “see” the actions of game players in three
dimensions, even without a wand.

The new Microsoft add-on to the Xbox, priced at \$1.50 a unit, for the
first time gave robotics researchers in the universities as well as
tinkerers and hobbyists a cheap way to build machines with
three-dimensional vision, Ford reports. Almost instantly, would-be
developers responded by creating such robots, and Industrial
Perception’s automated warehouse worker soon followed.

Thanks ultimately to the revolutionary improvement of computing
abilities according to Moore’s Law, but thanks in this particular
instances to rival developers of electronic games for children making
improvements to Wii, PlayStation and XBox, corporate owners of
industrial warehouses throughout our economy may soon have the ability
to reduce warehouse operating costs by replacing relatively low-wage
human workers with machines. Indeed, by the time *Rise of the Robots*
was going to press, Ford noted that such warehouse giants as Amazon and
the Kroger retail grocery chain had both begun to invest significantly
in the robot option.

Ford, like some other recent writers on robotics and automation, goes to
some trouble to demonstrate that low-paid, relatively low-skilled
industrial workers are not the only potential victims of thinking
machines in the economy. White-collar jobs are also at risk. Clever
researchers and designers also have created automated systems that can
compose musical symphonies, Ford observes; there is an existing program
called Quill, commercialized by a startup company called Narrative
Science, Inc., that can write short but coherent news stories for use in
newspapers or over the Internet. Large automobile companies as well as
Google already are at work trying to develop automated, driverless cars
that can function well in traffic.

Similarly, some white-collar professionals in large corporations are at
risk of losing their jobs to an “intelligent software platform”
developed by a New York City startup company called WorkFusion, whose
program “completely manages the execution of projects that were once
highly labor-intensive through a combination of crowd sourcing and
automation.” Today radiologists typically need 13 years of training
beyond high school to develop the skills needed to interpret medical
images accurately, Ford writes, and yet computers are getting
increasingly good at this task. In the fairly near future, accordingly,
“it’s quite easy to imagine that … radiology will be a job performed
almost entirely by machines.”

Ford therefore argues that the robotics revolution poses a significant
threat to the future of today’s college students and recent graduates,
who already in many cases are going deeply into debt to prepare
themselves for well-paid professional jobs that don’t become readily
available after graduation. As the automation and robotization of
currently high-skilled white-collar jobs accelerates, new university
graduates could face even greater challenges in obtaining jobs that will
pay well enough to repay their costs of university educations.

Yet although he’s concerned about robotization dimming the job prospects
of many white collar and professional workers, Ford predicts that the
automation revolution will have its most damaging results among low-wage
and relatively unskilled workers, both in the United States and other
advanced western companies and in the emerging economies of Africa, Asia
and Latin America.

The most important job losses resulting from industrial robots will
likely occur in China and other Asian economies where a large fraction
of industrial manufacturing occurs, Ford believes. The increasing
automation of low-paid agricultural work poses an enormous threat to the
large agricultural workforces of African and Asian economies, and by a
cruel irony of economic history, people who are driven off the land in
these countries will probably not be able to follow the example of
European peasants who were forced off their lands during the First
Industrial Revolution and forced to find factory work in the cities –
for in the Third World cities of the future, many of the factories are
likely to be highly automated.

Here in the United States where the service sector now provides the most
jobs, Ford concludes that the major employment impacts of automation and
robotics are likely to occur in the fast food business, in the
restaurant industry more generally, in some job categories within the
educational and health care sectors, and in retail stores of all
descriptions. Although robots and automation are growing ever more
sophisticated and potentially threaten white collar workers performing
relatively complex tasks, it is easier to design machines that can
replace human labor in relatively simple and repetitive jobs, and such
jobs are generally found at the bottom of the wage scale, not the top.

For this reason and other, more complicated ones that Ford articulates
in the book but are too cumbersome to explain here, *Rise of the Robots*
predicts that the increasing capabilities of thinking machines will
contribute to, if they are not already major contributing causes to,
such ongoing social and economic problems as increasing income
inequality and the growing domination of politics in the United States
by a highly automated financial sector and the super-rich.

How can the employment challenges and other negative economic aspects of
the robot revolution be mitigated and/or prevented? Ford considers the
idea some observers have floated, of trying to prevent the ongoing
robotization of work either through government fiat or moral and
economic appeals to employers, only to reject it.

Thus he cites the argument of Nicholas Carr, a contributor to *The*
*Atlantic*, that computer programmers and designers have mistakenly
adopted “technology-centered automation” as a “dominant design
philosophy” that has induced them to design systems that prioritize the
needs of technology over the needs of human beings. He also notes a “New
Grand Challenge” that MIT economist Erik Brynjolfsson has issued to
“entrepreneurs, engineers and economists” urging them to use technology
to invent systems that are complements to human labor, not substitutes
for it. As quoted by Ford, Brynjolfsson has called for such engineers
and entrepreneurs to replace their “labor-saving and automation mindset”
with a “maker and creator mindset.”

The problem is that this makes no economic sense, Ford argues. To wit:

“The bottom line is that, despite all the rhetoric about ‘job creators,’
rational business owners do *not want* to hire more workers; they hire
people only because they have to. The progression toward ever more
automation is not an artifact of “design philosophy’ or the personal
preferences of engineers; it is fundamentally driven by capitalism.”

Rather than the “rise of technology-centered automation” being the new
problem that *The Atlantic* has described, Ford continues, it began at
least 200 years ago during the first Industrial Revolution. “The only
difference today,” in his view, “is that exponential progress is now
pushing us toward the endgame. For any rational business, the adoption
of labor-saving technology will almost invariably prove to be
irresistible. Changing that would require far more than an appeal to
engineers and designers; it would require modifying the basic incentives
build into the market economy.”

One radical but seemingly logical way of handling the problem of the
employment impacts and growing economic inequality that are being
generated by automation and related technologies, Ford suggests, would
be to make “everyone a capitalist,” by distributing the ownership of the
companies doing automation much more widely, so that everyone could gain
from the economic efficiencies associated with robotics and even those
who lose their jobs because of it might benefit. But given the already
bitter polarization of politics in the United States, Ford thinks
large-scale redistribution of capital in our society is even less likely
than a large-scale redistribution of income.

Yet Ford’s major recommendation on how to handle the job effects of
increasing automation is based on an argument that is designed to appeal
to economic elites, and potentially even conservatives. It is that
ongoing automation, rising levels of unemployment, falling wages and
growing inequality will weaken consumer purchasing power in any
capitalist economy and, by weakening the purchasing power of the lower
classes, will ultimately hurt economic growth. It might possibly be
argued that job losses, low wages, high poverty rates and economic
injustice are economic, social and even moral evils in themselves, but
whatever Ford may believe, he doesn’t rely on this argument; he instead
focuses on the threat to “continued prosperity” and economic growth.

His main solution to the economic dislocations to be expected from
advanced computer technologies also is a “conservative” one, at least in
a sense. To maintain a prosperous capitalist economy and maintain the
consumer purchasing power of those displaced by technology even as
robotization continues, Ford suggests, we should adopt a “universal
basic income” as proposed several decades ago by the rightwing
conservative economist F.A. Hayek. Although the government spending
taxpayer money to provide a basic income to everyone would seem in flat
contradiction to almost everything that American conservatives believe
today, such a basic income would not only help to stabilize consumer
markets and make for a more stable market economy; it might even make
most Americans more willing to gamble their savings on investments in
capitalist technological progress, and be good for entrepreneurship – an
important conservative value.

The chances of a guaranteed universal income being adopted soon are nil,
Ford concedes, but as the robotics revolution continues accelerating and
its economic and social dangers become more obvious, policy preferences
may change, even among the conservatives. In the meantime, in the
absence of a universal guaranteed income, Ford identifies several
temporary, somewhat stopgap measures that he thinks would help. They
include first, a national program to rebuild the nation’s crumbling
infrastructure (as Bernie Sanders has proposed, although Ford obviously
does not cite Sanders in support of this goal).

A second near-term priority for handling the robotics and unemployment
crisis, according to Ford, is increasing the nation’s investment in
community colleges. Ford is skeptical of trying to address the
robotization challenge through education alone, as noted above, since so
many of today’s college graduates already are forced to work at jobs
that don’t make use of their education. Yet in general, “community
colleges represent one of our most important resources for enabling
workers to navigate an increasingly dynamic job market,” and Ford
recommends doing “everything possible” to make it easier for displaced
workers to get retrained through community colleges.

Two additional near-terms palliatives for technology-induced
unemployment that Ford admits are politically contentious are (a)
expanding the existing Earned Income Tax Credit for low-income parents
to increase its maximum benefits and open it up to single people who are
between jobs – thus, Ford admits, moving it closer to being a universal
guaranteed income; and (b) shifting federal taxes that support important
social programs away from payroll taxes, which essentially punish
corporations with large workforces, and toward “ a form of taxation that
asks more from those businesses that rely heavily on technology and
employ relatively few workers.”

Finally, Ford comments, there is one policy idea that ought to be
obvious to everyone in this age of growing technology-induced jobs
uncertainty. Given today’s technology trends, “it seems evident that we
should not now be setting out to dismantle the social safety net we now
have in place.” If there is any good time to slash social programs that
serve the most vulnerable members of the U.S. population, Ford
concludes, “then surely, *this is not that time.”*

There are many other economic and technological themes in Ford’s book
that cannot be summarized here, and democratic socialists may find fault
with some of them.   For example, Ford provides an extended
technological argument against the common conception among mainstream
economists, including many liberal economists, about job losses caused
by robots and automation likely being temporary, since new and possibly
better jobs are likely to be created as technology-based “creative
destruction” proceeds. This has generally been true in the past, Ford
concedes, but he argues that for both technical and economic reasons, it
probably won’t be true this time. Whether or not readers of the
*Washington Socialist* ultimately agree with Ford’s conclusions on this
and other topics, it would be good for some of us to master Ford’s
reasoning to find out.

[*Maryland: HOGAN BUDGET DROPS, AND THE FUN BEGINS IN
EARNEST*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-hogan-budget-drops-and-the-fun-begins-in-earnest/)

Sunday, January 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist*&lt;&gt;February 2016**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Now that Republican Gov. Larry Hogan has dropped his budget on
Maryland’s Democratic-dominated General Assembly, the fussing and
feuding about resources can begin. The budget is comfortably in surplus,
but Hogan’s passive-aggressive touch is visible throughout, as
Department of Legislative Services director and longtime budget guru
Warren Deschenaux discreetly pointed out in his briefing to the
legislators (pdf
[*here*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frm1st.aspx?tab=home) “fiscal
briefings” under the green “Budget” tab). The legislature can move money
around but not increase the governor’s budget total without finding
entirely new revenue sources.

In a year when money is less tight, ideology may regain some prominence
in the legislative battles in this 90-day session between now and
mid-April. The tone has been set early by the Assembly’s override of
five out of Hogan’s six vetoes from last year. The remaining, perhaps
most narrowly contested, override vote is to affirm a law passed last
year giving the vote to ex-offenders, which Hogan vetoed. The House of
Delegates successfully overrode that veto, but Senate President Mike
Miller is waiting for the governor’s appointment of a new senator from
Montgomery County. The former senator in that district resigned and the
county’s Democratic Central Committee has nominating a sitting Delegate
to replace her. Such appointments are generally a matter of courtesy.
But Miller has scheduled the override vote Feb. 5. Neither of the
bicameral legislature’s chamber leaders, Miller or House Speaker Mike
Busch, is a firebrand, but the Assembly is always ready to push back
against a governor of the opposite party, and that can give impetus to
progressive legislation that might otherwise languish.

As the region worked through a nearly two-foot blizzard the last week of
January, the Assembly made a great show of continuing its work. In fact
the House held numerous hearings on its 500-plus bills already filed.
The Senate, about a third the House’s size, had, by contrast, filed a
mere 27 bills by the Friday before Feb. 1’s resumption of business.

There is a fair amount of [*extra money
available*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-assembly-budget-20160121-story.html)
to be moved around in the Hogan budget. The Baltimore *Sun*’s Pamela
Wood’s rough estimate of Jan. 22 noted that “The proposed operating
budget leaves about \$450 million unspent. Lawmakers on both sides of
the aisle expect to debate whether to spend the money, hold onto it or
return some of it to taxpayers.”

One complication for the leadership is that many of the legislators will
come in with pet local projects to be funded by state bonds. However, no
pot of money has been included in the budget for that. That represents a
bit of a time bomb of omission by Hogan. Setting statewide budgeting
priorities of the Assembly against the legislators’ needs locally is a
potential divide-and-conquer strategy.

Baltimore catches the worst barbs in Hogan’s budget – that’ll teach them
to riot over police use of deadly force in Larry Hogan’s state. He has
already canceled the much-wished-for Red Line mass transit project
there. He’s provided none of the promised money for demolition of
blighted blocks (it’s now promised… later). A \$24 million cut in the
city’s school funding is said due to declining enrollment, but other
rural systems with declining enrollment get more than last year.

Prince George’s – though Hogan grew up there in its white-folks
political era and is the son of a local congressman – gets zero
operational money for its [*planned new
hospital*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/blog/bal-miller-busch-plan-spending-mandate-for-new-prince-georges-hospital-20160126-story.html).
Aggravated legislators included Senate President Miller, who vowed that
if the governor doesn’t add the \$15 million needed in a supplemental
this year the legislature will pass a bill mandating spending \$30
million for hospital operations (transitioning to University of Maryland
teaching-hospital status) next year as catch-up.

A panel of lawmakers put together a 22-item session agenda for police
reform that notably includes changes to the Law Enforcement Officers
Bill of Rights, a framework that has made it difficult for citizens and
other criminal justice officials to hold officers accountable for
misconduct, including use of excessive force. Activists have said that
Maryland’s version of LEOBOR, which exists in many other states, is the
worst of any state in blocking reform and accountability. Del. Curt
Anderson (D-Baltimore) has spearheaded the panel and promotes a bill
that along with LEOBOR reform “would grant more rights to victims of
police brutality … create a unified complaint system for tracking
problem officers and allow the public to watch police disciplinary
boards,” [*the Baltimore *Sun*
reported*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-policing-group-20160111-story.html).

The legislators are still steamed over Hogan’s refusal in the last
session to provide the mandated extra geographical schools subsidy to
major urbanized jurisdictions (Baltimore City, Montgomery and Prince
George’s counties – none of which voted for him) while slipping extra
cash to rural districts where he did well. They passed a law last year
requiring him to spend that money this year, so he has.

State employees have a hypothetical raise that is, um, not funded,
meaning the legislators will also have to scrounge funds for that from
the fast-shrinking stash of movable money. There is money, however, for
individual-increment step raises. To the extent those have a “merit”
dimension that could devolve a lot of arbitrary power to Hogan’s agency
heads. Hogan is proposing to cut state positions (not necessarily
workers) by 553, out of roughly 50,000 in the executive/agency category.

Some places and vested interests make out well, though, in this document
– Hogan budgets \$5 million to subsidize corporate contributions to
private schools. Small businesses and low-income taxpayers get cuts in
fees and taxes, reducing revenue by \$23 million. Giveaways to the
affluent may be buried in the budget but nobody (including Deschenaux)
has found them yet, other than the [*tax breaks for contributions to
private
schools*](http://marylandreporter.com/2016/01/27/hogan-announces-education-initiatives-early-graduation-gift/).
A very recent proposal for college scholarships to students who finish
high school early is getting a hard look from some Democrats and
educators who worry that such students will not be academically or
emotionally prepared for college. The possibility that this could be a
boondoggle for students from affluent families who have already
accumulated the demonstrated education-coping skills associated with
that economic class has not been brought up.

The legislature has some money to play with as noted above, including
\$25 million more in the pension fund supplemental than required. The
annual supplemental aims to bring the pension fund to full funding
sometime in the next decade. But it will be scrambled for by all,
including those with (above) local bond issues to guarantee.

Chipping away Hogan-style at unionized state employees continues, as
*Union City* reported Jan. 27:\
“**MD Cooks and PT Aides Fight for Jobs:** Seventy food service and
physical therapy employees at state hospitals in Maryland are fighting
for their jobs after being targeted by Maryland governor Larry Hogan,
reports their union, AFSCME 3.” The [*current effort at worker
privatization*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-state-layoffs-20160126-story.html)
targets hospitals and juvenile relief centers

A high and hoped-for priority this year, after three years of being
blocked in committees, is the earned paid sick leave effort. In the
early going it appears packaged by influential Democrats with several
other measures[ *billed as improving the lot of working
women*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/dc-politics/maryland-democrats-push-labor-bills-they-say-will-help-working-women/2016/01/27/ac8685f2-c520-11e5-8965-0607e0e265ce_story.html),
along with a “just hours” measure that would prevent employers from
juking employees’ schedules around, disrupting family life and
educational efforts. The powerful Senate Majority Leader, Baltimore’s
Catherine Pugh, is a co-sponsor of the sick leave bill (she is a
candidate for mayor in that city) and Prince George’s Del. Dereck Davis,
the chair of the House Economic Matters Committee that has buried the
sick leave bill for three straight years, is now running for the open
District 4 Congressional seat and has told activists he will prioritize
getting that bill to the floor this year. When Senate President Miller
was asked his position on paid sick leave, however, he shifted the
topic, saying his priority this year was closing the male-female pay
gap.

Paid sick leave legislation has recently been the target of [*a poll
funded by
opponents*](http://thedailyrecord.com/2016/01/26/md-paid-sick-leave-proponents-call-poll-fear-mongering/),
claiming that support for the bill dropped off when questions were added
about potential costs to business and job loss. Those were “scare
tactics,” said Melissa Broome of the [*Job Opportunities Task
Force*](http://www.jotf.org/). “The hypothetical effects that (the poll)
raises are not backed up with facts,” Broome said.

Environmental groups are pushing bills to ban plastic bags and put
deposits on plastic drink bottles, as well as ban the neonicotinoid
pesticides that, it is increasingly certain, are devastating pollinator
populations including bees. But a major battle over electric power
provision involves several bills that will increase the targets for the
portion of electric power that comes from renewable sources. One of
these, the [*Clean Energy Jobs
Act*](http://marylandclimatecoalition.org/top-md-lawmakers-push-clean-energy-expansion-record-large-jobs-bill-first-day-general-assembly/),
will be sweetened with \$40 million dedicated to training for green jobs
and bolstering the participation of women- and minority-owned businesses
in the clean energy trade. Those big numbers are getting interest from
legislators who have been tougher to get to for the largely white
environmental groups in the past.

Advocacy groups are already lining up Lobby Nights, mostly for Monday
evenings when the legislators hold office hours before the week’s one
evening session. Enviro groups have a Feb. 8 citizen lobby night for
[*Prince George’s and Anne Arundel
county*](http://org.salsalabs.com/o/423/p/salsa/event/common/public/?event_KEY=85235)
activists planned, plus one March 7 for [*Montgomery and Western
Maryland*](http://chesapeakeclimate.org/event/western-md-and-montgomery-county-lobby-night/),
and the [*Maryland AFL-CIO political
operation*](http://md.aflcio.org/mddcstatefed/) lobbies every Monday
night, meeting at their Annapolis lobby shop beforehand. Call
410-269-1940 for details and information. Baltimore-based [*Job
Opportunities Task Force*](http://www.jotf.org/) has a rich list of
legislative priorities (pdf at “New on the site/2016 State Policy
Priorities).

[*Moving Toward “Walking the Walk”: Allies in the Fights Against
Violence, Injustice and
Intolerance*](http://dsadc.org/moving-toward-walking-the-walk-allies-in-the-fights-against-violence-injustice-and-intolerance/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*By Ingrid Goldstrom*

Is Metro DC DSA a non-racist or anti-racist organization? How about its
individual members? To answer these questions, go to *The Guardian’s*
short video[*, “Are you a
racist?*](https://www.facebook.com/theguardian/videos/10153870551066323)”
Basically, the clip distinguishes being non-racist (as a moral stance)
from being anti-racist (action) by virtue of whether we “talk the talk”
or “walk the walk.”

One could argue that we are by and large a non-racist organization with
a number of individuals doing anti-racist work. Some of us do work
locally with umbrella groups such as Black Lives Matters and as members
of African American-led coalitions in movements so critical to the
success of the political revolution espoused by the Sanders campaign
around mass incarceration, police accountability, gentrification,
economic inequality, etc. Yet, in the effort to build a multi-racial
anti-racist DSA, we have lots of work to do.

If we want to expand our anti-racism work, there is no need for us to
start from scratch. We can work in coalition with groups like [*Showing
Up for Racial Justice
(SURJ)*](http://www.showingupforracialjustice.org/)

SURJ is a national network of groups (over 100 throughout the country)
and individuals organizing white people for racial justice. Through
community organizing, mobilizing, and education, SURJ moves white people
to act as part of a multi-racial majority. It provides a both a national
and local “one-stop shop” for finding out about events and learning more
about racial justice.

According to SURJ, the need for such an organization became evident when
participants in the post-Ferguson actions and protests responded to
reports that there also has been tension about how some white people
specifically were showing up in a non-helpful way. SURJ was asked by
people of color for two things:

-   \*\*To show up at actions called and organized by People of
    Color (POC)

-   \*\*To organize actions as white people to call attention to
    anti-Black racism and the threat to black lives and the lives of
    people of color

SURJ has sterling credentials. It was founded in 2009 in response to a
call – by people of color and whites engaged in racial justice work –
for more white people to challenge the racial backlash after President
Obama’s election. It focuses on working with people who, like us, are
already “in motion.” SURJ (formerly US for All of Us: No Room for
Racism) comes out of the Highlander Research and Education Center,
formerly known as the Highlander Folk School, a social justice
leadership training school and cultural center founded in 1932 and
currently located in New Market, Tennessee. Highlander has provided
training and education for the labor movement in Appalachia and
throughout the Southern United States. It played a critical role in the
American Civil Rights Movement; among its trainees were Rosa Parks, John
Lewis and other members of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
(SNCC), Martin Luther King, Jr. and Ralph Abernathy.

The SURJ website is rich in educational resources [*(see checklist,
related
article)*](http://dsadc.org/reshaping-yourself-and-your-surroundings-as-anti-racist-tips-from-surj/)
and contains information on actions that parallel much of what DSA does
around organizing; therefore, it can be useful for purposes of both
anti-racism work and organizing in general. These include the following:
notices of periodic “basebuilding” national telephone calls on such
topics as strategies for rural and small-town organizing, combating
anti-Arab racism and Islamophobia [*(see related
article)*](http://dsadc.org/fighting-the-current-scourge-of-islamophobia/);
action toolkits on how to undertake actions, including talking points
for the media and messaging on such topics as police accountability and
criminalization as well as a toolkit on how to start a SURJ chapters;
yard signs; and a search tool to find local actions.

Nationally, DSA chapters and SURJ chapters and affiliates are co-located
in about 30 cities, creating a great opportunity to collaborate with
like-minded people. Activities such as joint reading groups on race and
class, for example, could be explored. In addition, places where there
are DSA chapters and where SURJ does not exist provide an opportunity
for DSA to develop affiliates of SURJ. Where SURJ exists and DSA does
not have a chapter, individual DSA members will undoubtedly find a
welcoming home for racial justice work.

In Metro DC DSA, we are lucky enough to have three SURJ chapters in the
region: in DC, Baltimore and Northern Virginia. The DC listserv provides
a weekly calendar of events with specific requests for white allies to
step up.   An example of that is a call for SURJ members to sign up for
training on how to do childcare for Black allies who want to attend
events critical to them. Events listed include notifications from not
only Black Lives Matter but other organizations doing social justice
work. For example, the listserv provides notices of vigils for: Sandra
Bland, Freddie Gray Tamir Rice, Natasha Mckenna, and others, as well as
local workshops and conferences on racial justice issues, and actions
against Walmart and for farm workers. SURJ has also initiated a series
of metropolitan discussion groups for white folk to speak with other
white folk about stepping up to action around racial justice.

So, where to start? In our local, we can begin by inviting our
metropolitan SURJ chapters to come and tell us how we can plug into the
work they are so especially equipped to undertake.  Perhaps with
guidance from SURJ, a democratic socialist discussion group could be
initiated and/or a joint DSA/SURJ event could be planned to move us
forward in “walking the walk.”

[*Reshaping Yourself and Your Surroundings as Anti-Racist (Tips from
SURJ)*](http://dsadc.org/reshaping-yourself-and-your-surroundings-as-anti-racist-tips-from-surj/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*Compiled by Ingrid Goldstrom*

Some posts on the SURJ website provide “gentle reminders” of what it
means to do anti-racism work. From the artist and organizer [*Ricardo
Levins Morales*](http://www.rlmartstudio.com/) in “Whites fighting
racism: what it’s about…”

“You may not get the validation you hunger for…The thing is that when
you help put out a fire the people whose home was in flames may be too
upset to thank and praise you – especially when you look a lot like the
folks who set the fire. That’s OK. This is about something so much
bigger than that. “

According to SURJ (see [*related
article*](http://dsadc.org/moving-toward-walking-the-walk-allies-in-the-fights-against-violence-injustice-and-intolerance/)
for more), some of the basic do’s and don’ts below have been helpful to
other white folks engaging in this work.

**Do**: Organize white people to participate in actions led by People of
Color (POC). **Don’t**: Expect to lead those actions.

**Do:** Follow the directions of POC in actions. **Don’t:** Take over
the action; Escalate the action (unless directed to do so); Get so into
being the most radical person that your risky action becomes a
distraction.

**Do:** Help white people understand our “mutual interest” (i.e. what is
our stake) with POC in overturning a racist, oppressive system.
**Don’t:** Tell white people that they are “helping,” “supporting,” etc.
POC.

**Do:** Work as scouts, transportation, or other jobs as needed.
**Don’t:** Waste time feeling that you should be doing something more
“important.”

**Do:** Listen carefully to POC, especially when they are telling you to
stop doing something. **Don’t:** Interrupt; Assume you already know what
they’re going to say; Talk over.

**Do:** Educate yourself about interpersonal dynamics, racial justice
history and politics, learn about the local POC-led organizations, etc.
**Don’t:** Assume that POC will educate you; Assume that POC are or are
not as educated as you are; Tell POC that you know how they feel.

**Do:** Be aware of how your white privilege pushes you to claim
leadership and control. **Don’t:** Believe that struggling alongside POC
gives you a free pass to do whatever you want without consequences;
Think that you can ever get completely over your privilege and racism.

[*SANDERS SUPPORTERS RALLY IN DC; DSA BANNER LEADS
MARCH*](http://dsadc.org/sanders-supporters-rally-in-dc-dsa-banner-leads-march/)

![](media/image5.jpeg){width="3.1256944444444446in"
height="1.7604166666666667in"}

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*By Bill Mosley*

Nearly 200 supporters of Bernie Sanders’ presidential bid gathered at
chilly McPherson Square on January 30 for a march through the streets of
DC to the African-American Civil War Memorial, where they held a
pro-Sanders rally.

![](media/image6.jpeg){width="3.1256944444444446in"
height="1.7604166666666667in"}

*Metro DC DSA members Coleson Breen and Merrill Miller fire up the
crowd*

Metro-DC DSA had a strong presence at the event and our banner led the
march up Vermont Ave., drawing cheers from numerous spectators. Speakers
at the after-march rally included DSAers Merrill Miller and Coleson
Breen as well as representatives of pro-Sanders student groups in the
area. Singer-songwriter Hall Williams performed at the rally, getting
the crowd dancing with lyrics promising a “people’s revolution.”

“People appeared really excited to get more involved in the work and
several signed up to volunteer,” Breen said.

To get involved in the DSA for Bernie Campaign please check out our
[*Meetup page*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/) later this week.

The rally had been originally scheduled for January 23 but was postponed
by the snowstorm.

[*Socialism After Our
Time*](http://dsadc.org/socialism-after-your-time/)

Sunday, January 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*From the DSA National Office:*

Many people believe that only the rich can leave a meaningful legacy
gift to a cause. The truth is that even those of us with modest means
have insurance policies, pension benefits, wills or living trusts for
which we can designate beneficiaries like DSA.

Only about 50 percent of people have a will, but the truth is a bequest
is one of the simplest ways to support DSA. These thoughtful gifts
ensure that we can continue our critical work to fight for the values of
cooperation, solidarity, and socialism.

A sentence in your will or living trust can help promote DSA’s work and
our socialist values:

*“I give to the Democratic Socialists of America, Inc., 75 Maiden Lane,
New York, NY 10038 \[insert cash amount, or percentage of your estate,
or ‘all’\] to be used for general purposes.”*

Wills and trusts are legal mechanisms which usually require an attorney
to set up. However, many other legacy gifts do not require a lawyer to
establish. Many bank accounts including checking, money market, savings
accounts and certificates of deposit or IRA accounts have survivor
provisions allowing you to designate a survivor that assumes ownership
of the account after your death, as do life insurance policies. This
notice is not intended as legal advice, which should only come from an
attorney.

If you do designate DSA as a beneficiary, we would appreciate it if you
inform the DSA national office with whatever degree of specificity you
are comfortable with so we can thank you for your generosity. To learn
more about investing in solidarity for the future and putting DSA in
your will, contact us at [*(212) 727-8610*](tel:%28212%29%20727-8610) or
see [*www.dsausa.org/bequests*](http://www.dsausa.org/bequests).

By making a generous legacy gift to DSA, you can greatly support the
future of the socialist movement.

Maria Svart\
National Director\
Democratic Socialists of America\
[*msvart@dsausa.org*](mailto:msvart@dsausa.org)

[*Socialist Solidarity with Reproductive
Rights*](http://dsadc.org/socialist-solidarity-with-reproductive-rights/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

By M. Miller

Caroline O’Shea, director of NARAL Pro-Choice Virginia, and Diana
Philip, director of NARAL Pro-Choice Maryland, spoke on January 10 at
the monthly Metro-DC DSA meeting about the state of reproductive rights
in Washington, DC, Virginia and Maryland. Each area has its own
particular challenges to overcome to ensure that women have the right to
make decisions about their own reproductive health.

Reproductive rights for many women in Washington, DC, for instance, are
crippled by the Hyde Amendment, a law that prohibits federal funding for
abortion coverage and that prevents women on Medicaid, federal
government workers, women in the military, and members of the Peace
Corps from accessing affordable abortions. Virginia also severely limits
women’s reproductive rights by imposing waiting periods, biased
counseling and insurance restrictions on abortion care. Even Maryland,
often thought of as a relatively progressive state, restricts minors’
ability to obtain abortions and all too often fails to provide young
people with sound sexual education and access to condoms and other forms
of contraception.

I’ve [*written here
previously*](http://dsadc.org/raising-class-consciousness-through-abortion-activism/)
about how abortion restrictions are not merely a women’s problem but
largely a working women’s problem. While upper-class women will always
have access to abortion, whether it is legally accessible or not, many
middle-class women and certainly even more working class women are
facing greater difficulties in obtaining not only abortion care but
reproductive healthcare in general.

Despite abortion access’s importance in the lives of working class
women, the connection between socialism and the support for abortion
rights may not be immediately obvious. However, socialist and feminist
Sharon Smith, in her book *Women and Socialism: Class, Race, and
Capital*, argues that women’s oppression is related to the emergence of
class oppression. (The book was discussed at a January Jacobin reading
group meeting and is also to be discussed at a second [*DC *Jacobin*
reading group Feb. 4*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/227725398/).)
She states, “…at the same time that men were playing an increasingly
exclusive role in production, women were required to play a much more
central role in reproduction.” In other words, women’s oppression is
inherently linked not only to class but to women’s physical ability to
reproduce children.

Capitalism exploits women not only as workers but also for their free
labor in bearing and raising the next generation of workers. Therefore,
a full range of reproductive choices for women must be part of any
socialist agenda for widespread change in our society and our economic
system. True reproductive freedom must include not only the right to
abortion but also the right of women to bring children into the world
who will be supported by their communities. Women’s reproductive choices
then must include not only abortion access but also a myriad of issues
that affect women and their children such as state-funded daycare, a
robust public education system, and universal healthcare, among others.
These are all issues that socialists are already passionately
supporting, but even as we champion these causes for the working class,
we should not forget that they significantly impact working class women.

Socialists certainly face significant challenges to implement these
social supports for working mothers, and we perhaps have an even more
arduous battle ahead of us to secure abortion access for *all* women,
not just the wealthy few. The first step we can take is to educate
ourselves about what the current landscape of reproductive rights looks
like. Educating ourselves at the January 10^th^ membership meeting was
taking that first step, and I encourage my comrades to take that step
even further by checking out updates from [*NARAL Pro-Choice
Virginia*](http://www.naralva.org/), [*NARAL Pro-Choice
Maryland*](http://www.prochoicemd.org/), the [*Guttmacher
Institute*](https://www.guttmacher.org/) and other resources on
reproductive rights. We might not always agree with these organizations,
or particularly with NARAL’s recent endorsement of Hillary Clinton, but
we can stand in solidarity with their desire to see a society where
women in our society have access to a full range of reproductive rights.

[*Union-Community Unity Leads to Victory: 700 Safeway Jobs Saved in
Prince George’s
County*](http://dsadc.org/union-community-unity-leads-to-victory-700-safeway-jobs-saved-in-prince-georges-county/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*By Kurt Stand*

On January 21, members of Teamsters Local 639 and Local 731 voted to
ratify a new contract for the nearly 1000 workers employed at Safeway
Distribution centers in Upper Marlboro and Landover, Md. The union had
to make some wage and benefit concessions, but preserved the job of
every worker threatened by a permanent layoff. It was the culmination of
a successful campaign that began in October when those workers were
given notice that the warehouses were going to be shut down, with the
work transferred to non-union facilities in Pennsylvania. Union unity,
amongst Teamster members, from the Metro Washington Labor Council and
its affiliated unions, and broad community support were the reasons why
the jobs were won.

Moreover, local elected officials in Prince George’s County and
state-wide in Maryland were upfront and vocal in support of the workers.
There was a great deal of anger, because Safeway had been given tax
breaks by the county to build new state-of-the-art facilities to keep
local jobs – facilities and jobs threatened with abandonment.

That, of course, is the problem now experienced in Washington DC where
Walmart, after receiving preferential treatment in order to enter the
city, then decided not to open stores in the neighborhoods were jobs are
most needed (see related story this issue by Bill Mosley). What is at
issue here isn’t one particular company, but a model of business. The
conflict in Prince George’s began because Safeway had entered into a
business relationship with C&S Wholesale Distributors, a huge private
corporation that has a history of union-busting, shutting down organized
workplaces and shifting work to their non-union center in Pennsylvania.
In 2011, 1,000 organized warehouse workers lost their jobs in New Jersey
when C&S shut down A&P operations in the area. A&P and other regional
supermarket chains have filed lawsuits against C&S because of their
monopolistic practices, which lead to business shutdowns. It is a model
that respects neither workers nor communities, a model that drives local
businesses out of business – symptomatic of the drift of our entire
economic system.

The victory just won gains extra importance because it resulted in
Safeway taking back control of its warehouses from C&S in exchange for
financial incentives from state and municipal leaders. The six-year
agreement signed with the Teamster locals guarantees no outsourcing
during the length of the contract.

Nonetheless, vigilance is still needed – the layoffs likely would never
have been proposed in the first place had Cerberus Capital Management
not purchased controlling interest in the retailer along with other
grocery food chains. Symptomatic of the entire drift of neo-liberal
economics, Cerberus is a hedge fund that makes money by closing
thriving, profitable, companies, and reinvesting the money elsewhere to
reap even bigger financial rewards. This parasitic model of corporate
behavior is very much in line with the deregulation of banks, a model of
the economy in which corporate profits and the production of goods and
services have largely been severed.

Yet the preservation of the jobs shows that workers can fight back to
preserve their jobs and their rights. In the words of Teamster Local 730
President Ritchie Brooks: “The key to our victory was that everyone
banded together. Labor, political leaders and the community all came
together to show Safeway our solidarity.”

Sources:

[*http://inthesetimes.com/working/entry/18520/cs\_wholesale\_grocers\_safeway\_layoffs*](http://inthesetimes.com/working/entry/18520/cs_wholesale_grocers_safeway_layoffs)

[***http://www.nj.com/business/index.ssf/2011/02/1000\_workers\_laid\_off\_in\_groce.html***](http://www.nj.com/business/index.ssf/2011/02/1000_workers_laid_off_in_groce.html)

[***http://www.dclabor.org/union-city-news***](http://www.dclabor.org/union-city-news)**:
1/22/16, 1/20/16, 11/13/15, 10/18/15**

**Teamster Website: “**Teamsters, Elected Officials, Community Leaders
Tell Safeway To Keep Jobs In Maryland’ 10/16/15

[*Update: WHUT-TV to participate in FCC
auction*](http://dsadc.org/update-whut-tv-to-participate-in-fcc-auction/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

** ***By Carolyn M. Byerly*

As anticipated, Howard University President Wayne Frederick announced in
mid-January that the university, owner of public station WHUT-TV, would
participate in the Federal Communication Commission’s reverse auction.
That process (also called the incentive auction) allows station
licensees to sell off all or part of their access to the electromagnetic
spectrum they use for broadcasting.

Howard has three options – to sell all rights to its spectrum, to move
the broadcast station from UHF to VHF spectrum, or to enter into a
shared arrangement (partnership) with another public station. All deals
are secret until finalized, which should be summer or fall 2016.

The university, which is experiencing a major fiscal challenge brought
on by the Congress’s sequestration of \$20 million in funds to Howard,
and the Howard Hospital’s continuous financial losses, is looking at
WHUT to bring in somewhere between \$100 million and \$500 million in
revenues. Congress created Howard University in 1867 to educate and
advance research related to African Americans, and the university has
received an annual allotment from Congress in all the years since. While
that allotment today makes up less than 20 percent of the university’s
budget, its loss at this particular time has contributed to Howard’s
fiscal problems.

WHUT is the only African-American-owned public TV station in the US, and
presently has 2 million viewers. Marketing research has shown that the
African American audience is increasing for all public broadcast
stations, jumping from 17% to 23% between 2011 and 2012.

Our Howard Media Group has [*posted another protest and
analysis*](http://www.howardmediagroup.org/news/hmg-replies-presidents-announcement-howard-will-participate-auction-12016)
of the decision on our website which puts the situation into a bigger
context of the communication industry under neoliberalism.
Telecommunications is the second largest income-generating industry in
the world (second only to the pharmaceutical industry), and those who
derive those profits wield enormous economic and political power both
nationally and internationally.

Research by the civil rights group Operation Push shows that
representation by women and non-white individuals on boards of directors
of traditional media, cable, and new media companies ranged from only7%
to 30% in 2012. The matter of who has access to the channels of
communication arises and who controls the policies of those companies is
more than a scholarly concern for those of us who have followed the
selling off of public airwaves. Who should speak for whom in a democracy
also determines who has access to the public sphere, a discursive space
required for democracy to function.

A [*January 16 article in the *Washington
Post**](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2016/01/13/your-local-tv-station-may-have-just-secretly-decided-to-go-off-the-air/)
claimed that Howard has until March to decide if it will withdraw its
letter of intent, but that provision hasn’t been verified by anything
available on the FCC website.

As this issue of the *Washington Socialist* goes to press, members of
Howard Media Group are planning to meet and discuss next steps in
addressing the potential loss of this important station. These steps may
include the calling of a public meeting to allow supporters of the
station to air their grievances over the impending sale of WHUT.\
*Carolyn M. Byerly is a member of the Metro DC DSA.  She chairs the
Department of Communication, Culture & Media Studies at Howard
University, and is a member of Howard Media Group.*

*Notes:*

See the [*Spectrum Act of
2012*](https://www.fcc.gov/document/broadcast-television-spectrum-incentive-auction-nprm),
which enables the continued sale of broadcast licenses.

See the Corporation for Public Broadcasting’s report [*Facing the
Spectrum*](http://www.cpb.org/spectrum/reports/CPB-White-Paper-on-Spectrum-Auction-and-Repacking-Process.pdf?pdf=CPB-White-Paper):
Incentive Auction and Repacking Process (2012).

 

[*WALMART STAYS IN CHARACTER IN ITS BETRAYAL OF
DC*](http://dsadc.org/walmart-stays-in-character-in-its-betrayal-of-dc/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; February 2016**

*By Bill Mosley*

Walmart’s recent announcement that it would renege on its promise to
build two stores in low-income, predominately African American
neighborhoods of the District is par for the course for a corporation
that built its fortune on exploitation – of its communities, its workers
and its customers.

The “handshake agreement” that former Mayor Vince Gray reached with the
company allowing it to build stores in higher-income neighborhoods in
exchange for promising a store at [*Skyland Town
Center*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/walmart-backs-out-of-dc-deal-citing-costs-and-citys-poorest-pay-the-price/2016/01/19/af963e00-becb-11e5-9443-7074c3645405_story.html)
was, as we have seen, not worth the sweat that exchanged palms. There
was nothing on paper, nothing legally binding that required Walmart to
do anything, and once the company got the properties it wanted most, it
thumbed its nose at the DC residents who supported the new Walmarts for
the jobs and shopping opportunities – in lower-income, African American
neighborhoods where both are scarce – that the stores would bring. The
Skyland neighborhood has actually wound up in even worse condition than
before, with many of its aging stores having already been demolished in
anticipation of the Walmart that now will never come. At the same time,
Walmart also canceled its plans for a store at Capitol Gateway, like
Skyland located in the retail- and job-starved portion of the District
east of the Anacostia River.

Five years ago, as Walmart was gearing up for its entry into DC,
Metro-DC DSA was part of the citywide “[*Respect
DC*](http://jufj.org/content/respect-dc-living-wages-healthy-communities)”
coalition demanding that Walmart meet a series of conditions if it was
to come to the District, including local hiring, a living wage for
employees, and protections for small businesses. These demands were
based on the recognition that Walmart is no ordinary chain of big-box
stores. It has become the [*world’s largest
corporation*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/walmart-backs-out-of-dc-deal-citing-costs-and-citys-poorest-pay-the-price/2016/01/19/af963e00-becb-11e5-9443-7074c3645405_story.html)
by adopting a business model of low wages for retail workers, hostility
to unions, and relentless pressure on its overseas factories to keep
costs down – resulting in manufacturing workers in such countries as
China, Bangladesh and Honduras working in sweatshop conditions for less
than a dollar a day. It also is infamous for moving into mostly smaller
communities and driving locally owned businesses to ruin with its low
prices – and then, when customers have no shopping options other than
Walmart, often jacking prices back up. The company’s foray into DC was
part of a new strategy of opening in urban markets, as the company’s
exploitation of suburbs and small towns began to produce diminishing
returns. But in the case of Skyland, Walmart killed off local businesses
even without opening a store of its own.

But in the end, Walmart’s opponents in the District had little leverage
to force the company to either be a good neighbor or stay away. Walmart
did sign a watered-down “community benefits agreement” that contained no
promises on wages or worker rights. The DC Council considered but failed
to pass a bill that would require big-box stores such as Walmart to pay
a higher-than-minimum wage, with much of the DC political establishment
eager to welcome Walmart with open arms. With many of DC’s lower-income
neighborhoods desperate for jobs and places to shop – many residents
live miles from a supermarket – Walmart appeared to offer one-stop
shopping for the District’s economic needs. And so with the feeble
promise extracted from Gray to serve some of DC’s neediest
neighborhoods, Walmart proceeded with building stores near Union
Station, on upper Georgia Ave. and at Fort Totten Square, the latter one
opening last fall with a ribbon-cutting ceremony featuring Mayor Muriel
Bowser.

After Walmart’s announced it would not build the Skyland and Capitol
Gateway stores, Bowser said she was “blood mad” about the company’s
treachery. (Bowser, it must be remembered, opposed the bill to require
Walmart to pay a higher wage when she was a councilmember). But the ire
of DC officials is matched only by their inability to do anything about
it. Walmart holds all the cards; it can pull out of communities at will,
and its cancellation of the two DC stores was part of an [*announced
shuttering of 154 stores nationwide, about two-thirds of which are the
smaller-format Walmart Express stores, as well as over 100 stores in
Latin
America*](http://www.cbsnews.com/news/walmart-to-shutter-269-stores/)
Only rarely has a community blocked the company from moving in, even in
the face of considerable opposition. A possible silver lining is that
the company’s retrenchment might indicate that its business model of
retail shock-and-awe with low-wage labor is running its course.

Perhaps it is time for communities, including DC, to cease depending on
the kindness of giant corporations for jobs and economic development.
Instead, local governments should be doing more to incubate small,
locally owned businesses that serve, and are responsive to, the needs of
their neighborhoods. Providing aspiring local entrepreneurs with
low-cost (or no-cost) loans, assistance in acquiring permits and
overcoming other regulatory hurdles, and guidance in marketing
themselves to the community could create businesses that keep wealth
local while leading to true neighborhood revitalization.

In today’s corporate-driven environment, the idea of communities taking
charge of their economic development might seem utopian. But until they
do, big business will be in charge, and cities and towns will have to
dance to their tune.

 
