***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the June 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the Midsummer edition of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-midsummer-edition-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Tuesday, July 15th, 2014

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the midsummer edition of the *Washington Socialist*, the
email newsletter of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America.**

You may think that politics does not happen in the summer in Washington,
D.C. and its adjacencies in Maryland and Virginia. We will try to show
you there is more than meets the eye, and that serious politics in
summer can have its fun aspects – even picnicking.

**THE NEAR-TERM AGENDA:**

The plight of the long-term unemployed remains acute, new legislation
may be moving and, as you’ll see, you can find out much more on the
topic in this issue. A number of progressive groups and members of
Congress have been participating in [*“Witness
Wednesdays,”*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=447002ace0&e=003de9ccab)
a midday event that happens next this **Wednesday, July 16 at 12:30
p.m.** on the Hill. The theme there, too, is long-term unemployment and
the effort backs renewal of that lifeline to jobless workers, which was
cut off at the end of 2013 (see more in the articles below). The witness
event also takes place July 23 and July 30. Location details are at the
link above.

**This Friday, July 18: the local sponsors a discussion on the Cecily
McMillan case.** Cecily, [*DSA
member*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=im_nvrIB-Rw&list=UUpU4j-LN_aibXA1gONvWzxw)
and Occupy Wall Street activist, was released from some 60 days’
incarceration at Rikers Island in New York a few weeks ago after a show
trial and conviction in May on trumped-up charges of assaulting a police
officer. The[ *injustice of her
treatment*](http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2014/05/cecily-mcmillan-from-zuccotti-park-to-rikers.html)
and the clear evidence of a wider campaign to suppress the Occupy
movement through police and the courts have galvanized many
progressives, even several years after the Occupy movement went off the
MSM radar. “After Rikers: What’s Next For Cecily McMillan” is 6-8 p.m.,
1133 19th St. NW (Audio Visual Room, first floor). Scheduled speakers
include one of Cecily’s support principals, Lucy Parks. The location is
between L and M Streets, best access from Farragut North or Dupont
Circle stations on Metro’s Red Line. Updates at the Metro DC DSA Meetup
site.

**AUGUST 9 – Metro DC DSA summer picnic, Saturday afternoon, The
National Mall (site TBA). Best probability now is in the shady areas
toward the Lincoln Memorial end of the Reflecting Pool. ** Candidates
for the at-large seats in the DC Council Elections will be invited. Note
that DSA will discuss possible endorsement of progressive candidates in
that race and others in the region at its September meeting; all paid-up
members of the local can vote on endorsements at that time. The picnic
will not only afford a chance to hear and meet with candidates or their
representatives; it will also be a real picnic, with food and drink.
**Watch the Meetup site and Metro DC DSA website for more information –
location, transportation and time – as the picnic’s date approaches.**

**Would YOU Like to Serve on the Metro DC Chapter’s Cultural & Event
Planning Committee?  Here’s How…**\
A new-old committee will have an **organizing meeting Sunday, July 27**
in a museum courtyard. ***Details…*** The local steering committee has
voted to reestablish a local DSA committee that worked very well in the
past:  a local Cultural and Event Planning Committee to do the planning
and preparatory work for major DC-DSA events of potential interest to
members, supporters and the progressive public.\
Steering committee member Andy Feeney has been delegated to chair the
first meeting of this committee; however, the hope is that other members
and supporters of our local chapter with interest and/or experience in
planning public events will turn up for the first organizing meeting,
and that someone else will emerge to serve as permanent chair person who
has the desire and skills needed to make the committee a success.\
If you have an interest in serving on or chairing this local DSA
committee, and if you have creative ideas about the kinds of cultural
and public education events that the Metro DC chapter should be holding,
please plan on attending the first organizing meeting.\
It is tentatively scheduled for the inner courtyard at the Gallery of
American Art near the Gallery Place/China Town stop on the Red Line at
3:30 p.m. – 5:30 p.m. on Sunday, July 27.  If you want to participate in
cultural affairs and event planning but this date and time are not good
for you, please contact Andy Feeney at
[*ajfeeney48@yahoo.com*](mailto:ajfeeney48@yahoo.com) to see if we can
make other arrangements, or to suggest event ideas.

**IN THE NEWSLETTER**

*Gains in meaningful employment are a national priority of DSA of
course, reflected in its support for renewal of long-term unemployment
compensation (lapsed at the end of last year) and for Rep. John Conyers’
HR1000, which would use a financial transactions tax to fund
infrastructure job spending and job training activity. We begin with
some articles dealing with, or related to, job creation*.

**Conyers was a sponsor** of a June conference and panel on the Hill to
examine the causes and effects of long-term unemployment. *Andy Feeney*
and *Woody Woodruff* examine that progressive-leaning event, which had
panelists from the White House, Economic Policy Institute and National
Employment Law Project. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=9109651f8b&e=003de9ccab)

**One of the more effective strategies** for combating unemployment
swings and their damage is managing available work and available workers
as a coherent system. In Germany the strategy is called
***kurzarbeit***, or short work, and its success there in smoothing the
impact of the Great Recession has led to congressional legislation and
action at the state level. *Cecilio Morales* examines the prospects of
the US version. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=5c138ca554&e=003de9ccab)

As federal (and hence state) infrastructure and other employment
stimulus activities have waned, **the notion that the private sector can
pick up the slack** and construct or operate public goods for profit has
gained currency. That *echt*-Thatcherite notion is of course boosted by
think tanks and other public-relations mouthpieces funded by big
business. *Andy Feeney*’s article examines the many pitfalls and meager
benefits in the public-private partnership fad. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=465dfa9ac9&e=003de9ccab)

The on-site **complexities of the Ukraine situation** are compounded by
the US tilt toward the EU and consequent inability to grasp some
important facts about Russia, Ukraine and their political cultures. *Dan
Adkins* traces some of the fault lines of misunderstanding. [*Read
complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ac48abca29&e=003de9ccab)

Recent, **outrageous decisions by John Roberts’s Supreme Court** have
had a collective impact on working women that is only beginning to be
realized. *Kurt Stand* explores some of the impacts and the way they tie
in with the longer threads of history of oppression of women in the
workplace.[ *Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8b98429b8b&e=003de9ccab)

**Had enough Piketty?** Whether you have or not, there’s a related trend
that sees headline writers striving for new variants in making the
French economist’s sometimes-difficult last name a part of the story.
*Bill Mosley* examines the trends and imagines the worst. [*Read
complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=25e46c41a4&e=003de9ccab)

**LOCAL:**

In a trio of **news briefs**, *Dan Adkins* reports on a demo in Virginia
against corporate-tilted trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific
Partnership; *Andy Feeney* touts Progressive Democrats of America’s
website-based tools for pushing “jobs for all” legislation and *Adkins*
discusses a promising new wrinkle in Virginia Democrats’ caucus process
for choosing candidates – instant runoff voting. [*Read all three
articles*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=df71307930&e=003de9ccab)

The affordability of the District of Columbia’s housing stock is tough
at the best of times, but it is not the best of times for **the city’s
“broken” rent control program**. *Andy Feeney* reports on a meeting that
explained and rallied support for two City Council bills that could tilt
the system back toward the hard-pressed renters it is supposed to
benefit. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=c6248da0e7&e=003de9ccab)

**BOOKS**:

Ben Ross, who has been with or in DSA earlier in his career, has for
several decades fought for the light-rail Purple Line in the Maryland
suburbs against corporate and elite interests that try to dilute its
usefulness. Now he has written a book – ***Dead End:  Suburban Sprawl
and the Rebirth of American Urbanism***—that recounts that struggle in
(as the subtitle suggests) a broader context. *Bill Mosley* reviews this
significant book about a paradigmatic struggle for a new public good
that will link many of our neighborhoods. [*Read complete
article.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=bfd44d7753&e=003de9ccab)

**GOOD READS**

We help you link up to **the best in progressive reads** (and an AV
treat or two). [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=4f23a7e0ef&e=003de9ccab)

**As you enjoy them, don’t forget that you are invited, nay urged, to
contribute your own findings and treasures to the next list. Email the
links, with commentary if you are so moved, to**
[***woodlanham@gmail.com***](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
All newsletter articles in full are available on the local’s website at
[*dsadc.org*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=101fa6af5a&e=003de9ccab)
including archives of past issues from September 2012.

**DCDSA’s *The Washington Socialist* can be in your inbox the first of
every month. Ask for it at**
[***dsadcxchange@gmail.com***](mailto:dsadcxchange@gmail.com) **or**
[***woodlanham@gmail.com***](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com)

[*‘Nothing Up My Sleeve …’ The Tricky Corporate Magic of Public-Private
Partnerships*](http://dsadc.org/nothing-up-my-sleeve-the-tricky-corporate-magic-of-public-private-partnerships/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

To political cynics, it may seem like the classic demonstration of the
surprising but well-known tendency, under some circumstances, of
powerless people who are being abused to look to their victimizers for
salvation, especially when no other help seems available. To some of the
rest of us, it might be simpler to think of it as just a rational
response to armed robbery.  In any case, the facts seem clear.

For decades now, free-market or “neoliberal” ideologues opposed to Big
Government have been working to make social democracy unaffordable in
the U.S. by slashing government revenues and increasing government
debts.  At the urging of free market fundamentalists and corporate
lobbyists alike, politicians from both major parties have cut taxes for
corporations and the rich, committed the government to trillions of
dollars of legal liability to bail out failing capitalist banks and
large capitalist automobile companies, allowed George Bush and Dick
Cheney to launch a costly and badly bungled invasion of Iraq, and
supported Pentagon budgets even larger and padded with pork than those
the Pentagon claims to need.

Thanks to corporate-backed efforts to increase the government’s expenses
while reducing its revenues, many state, federal and local agencies
funding the nation’s infrastructure requirements and meeting the needs
of the jobless and the economically insecure now are on the chopping
block.  The U.S. government itself is roughly \$17 trillion in debt, and
under a budget deal reached between the Obama administration and hostile
House Republicans, most federal agencies face the threat of
“sequestration” cuts for years to come.  So how are some of our
political leaders proposing to save endangered programs from chronic
government budget crisis? By funding them in the future through
“public-private partnerships” – through agreements to turn over
essential public functions to the same capitalist private sector that
has worked so hard to create a government budget crisis in the first
place.

Public-private partnerships (sometimes abbreviated as P3s, or as PPPs)
have become increasingly popular in recent years, as writer Darwin
Bondgraham reported recently in the leftwing economics journal *Dollars
& Sense. * When his article on P3s as “highway robbery” appeared in late
2012, at least 30 state legislatures around the country had passed laws
specifically designed to facilitate P3 or PPP deals.  But judging from a
visit this year to the web site of the libertarian Reason Foundation (a
major promoter of PPPs), the number of states favorable to these
alternate financing arrangements has now grown to 33.  Some financially
stressed local governments, and D.C. region governments, have begun
[*turning to P3 financing as well. 
*](http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2014-07-02/features/bs-md-offshore-wind-auction-20140702_1_offshore-wind-project-turbines-cape-wind)

Virginia has become a significant user of P3 or PPP financing to fund
new infrastructure projects, and the District of Columbia may soon be
joining the trend.  Last December, Council members Muriel Bowser and
David Grosso jointly introduced a “Public Private Partnership Act of
2013” to establish a separate agency within D.C. government with
extensive powers to review proposed P3 projects and negotiate deals with
developers, albeit with some oversight from the elected Council.

Judging from recent comments at a June 24 panel discussion on long-term
unemployment called by DSA ally Rep. John Conyers, the Obama
administration also is apparently looking to P3s in some form to promote
new private sector job creation.  The progressive nonprofit organization
the National Employment Law Center is doing so as well ([*see related
story*](http://dsadc.org/panel-new-bills-raise-hope-for-relief-for-millions-of-long-term-unemployed/),
this issue of the *Washington Socialist).*

Similarly, in an April discussion of the nation’s unfunded
infrastructure needs on the liberal *Diane Rehm Show,* Rehm’s guests
essentially agreed that P3s offer the only realistic option for
whittling the huge U.S. infrastructure backlog down to size.  (For a
transcript, see
[*http://thedianerehmshow.org/shows/2014-04-29/aging-infrastructure-and-need-new-era-transportation-policy/transcript*](http://thedianerehmshow.org/shows/2014-04-29/aging-infrastructure-and-need-new-era-transportation-policy/transcript).)

In the District, where Muriel Bowser is currently the Democratic
candidate for mayor, Bowser has said that she wants her P3 bill passed
to “provide security to private investors” so they will plow more money
into Washington-area development.  Bowser has indicated on previous
occasions that she sees P3s as an essential tool in tackling
homelessness in the District, and for meeting other social needs as
well, such as aging schools, new public transit construction and water
infrastructure funding.

As her office put it in a press release last December, “This city’s
needs are growing at a rate that we can’t sustain with our constrained
capital budget and unpredictable federal funding … Cities and states
across the country and world have been using P3s for years.  Now it’s
the District’s turn.  We’ll use this funding tool in a smart,
responsible way, take some of the politics and dysfunction out of
procurement, and make the private sector work with us to build critical
infrastructure.”

Other P3 advocates may not be as focused on the alleged social benefits
of this alternative financial mechanism as Bowser is, however.  They
undoubtedly have private interests in mind. As Bondgraham reported in
his *Dollars & Sense* article, “The handful of global construction
companies, investment banks, and private equity firms that dominate the
P3 market today spend millions each year lobbying lawmakers in key U.S.
states.”  These business lobbying groups are proposing to use P3s not
just to finance highway infrastructure projects, but also “expanding
into the privatization of public building projects (like court
buildings), parking garages and metering systems, and other so-called
‘social infrastructure.’”.

The highly conservative and corporate-funded American Legislative
Exchange Council or ALEC has drawn up a model state P3 law, Bondgraham
notes, although the Reason Foundation has been more active than ALEC in
promoting this concept. Clearly, both the libertarian intellectuals and
the major corporations involved in existing P3 deals are looking to this
form of financing as a source of private profit.

As Bondgraham indicates, many right wingers also see P3 financing as a
form of privatization, and thus as advancing a libertarian agenda. On
the Reason Foundation web site, for example, yearly reports on the
progress of P3 legislation are included in larger reports on state and
local privatization efforts.

et at the same time, it seems likely that the Obama White House and
Council member Bowser also are sincerely interested in seeing P3s used
for public purposes, notably including new job creation.  Is this a rare
occasion on which the interests of conservatives and progressives neatly
converge, and corporate investors and left wing advocates for the
dispossessed can find a common cause in marrying the capitalist profit
motive to the public good?  Or in this particular marriage of the profit
motive to the public interest, will one of the partners inevitably end
up being abused?

The issue is becoming an urgently important one nationwide, given the
growth of government deficits and the size of unmet infrastructure and
social spending needs. Yet so far, it seems to be flying beneath the
public’s radar screen.

Worryingly, many political progressives seem to have been ignoring both
the potentially positive and potentially negative implications of P3s
for years now, as we have focused on other, seemingly more urgent issues
ranging from the minimum wage to war in Iraq.  Meanwhile the Reason
Foundation and ALEC have been shaping proposed P3 laws to their liking. 
Therefore relatively few Americans on the left today seem to have
anything but a superficial knowledge of what proposed P3 deals might
signify.

For most DSA members, it’s probably safe to say that P3s in many ways
represent the very opposite of the “socialist” or even mildly
social-democratic reforms we hope to see adopted in this country.  P3s
are being promoted by activists on the right, during the same era in
which Republicans are trying to dismantle or at least hamstring the U.S.
Postal Service and get many of its unionized employees fired. Praise for
P3s is being voiced by some of the same people who are trying to
privatize state prisons, public university facilities and public
schools, not to mention supporting Pentagon “outsourcing” to the private
sector of military support functions once performed by members of the
U.S. Armed Services.

In terms of ideological debate, the rhetoric of “public private
partnerships” appears to be a continuation of a corporate crusade
against government social programs that has been underway since the
mid-1970s, at the least, and that progressive historian Kim
Phillips-Fein traces back to the elitist revolt against Roosevelt’s New
Deal in the 1930s.   In the words of Marxist geographer David Harvey,
author of *The Enigma of Capital,* corporate enthusiasm for P3s can
probably be thought of in terms of a stagnant global capitalism trying
to find new investment outlets through new assaults on the “commons.”

In a more pragmatic, short-term sense, what about the costs of P3s to
the taxpayer?  On a purely economic level, *Dollars & Sense* reports, P3
projects initially appear to save the public money, since they reduce or
eliminate the need for state, local and federal units of government to
fund large capital investment projects directly, though increased
taxation or borrowing on private bond markets.  However, the total
lifetime costs of projects financed through P3s, as opposed to the more
traditional “design-bid” process, are generally larger.

This is partly because when a large investment bank finances a P3
through borrowing on the private market, its interest rates are often
higher than a government agency with a good credit rating might pay,
Bondgraham notes.  The added interest costs ultimately get passed
through to the public, either in the form of taxpayer support for the P3
partners, or through higher tolls and user fees on the project, or both.

Also, large P3 projects are often bid as package deals, and in a
successful bid, the private companies involved might agree to do work on
the later stages of a big project without putting the work out for
competitive bidding.  This streamlines getting the project completed,
but may result in the public paying a higher overall price than a
competitive bidding process would generate.

Private companies that enter into P3 arrangements pay the upfront costs
of, say, large scale infrastructure construction, but they recoup their
expenses by charging tolls to infrastructure users.  In some cases where
revenues from tolls have proven inadequate to meet the P3 companies’
profit goals, fine-print contract clauses have required taxpayers to
make up the difference through so-called “availability payments,” which
boost the projected costs of a project overall.  And in a few cases,
Bondgraham reports, governments have bought back failed P3 projects from
private partners under the threat of lawsuits – facing taxpayers with
yet another unexpected expense.

Some genuine cost savings that private companies involved in P3s have
been able to achieve have come at the cost of construction workers,
Bondgraham adds, since P3 developers sometimes can avoid paying union
wages on construction projects where public agencies would need to
follow the rules of the federal Davis-Bacon Act.

All these are excellent reasons for democratic socialists and other
progressives to look on proposed P3 laws and proposed P3 projects with
skepticism, to say the least.  But in fairness to DC Council member
Bowser and the economic planners of the Obama administration, the
enormous public needs that they are apparently hoping to finance by
enlisting private corporations in the process are real, and indeed are
urgently pressing.  It is understandable that some generally progressive
politicians, along with others who may be a bit more conservative and
wedded to capitalism at all costs, may feel an urge to meet these needs
“by any means necessary,” to quote Malcolm X out of context.

DSA and some other progressive groups – notably the National Nurses
Association and other advocates of the so-called “Robin Hood Tax”– have
long advocated the financing of government job-creation programs through
a small financial transaction tax (FTT) on Wall Street speculators. 
This is one key reason, among others, why DSA supports Rep. Conyer’s
H.R. 1000, the proposed “Humphrey Hawkins Full Employment and Training
Act,” which would raise hundreds of billions in added government
revenues through a small FTT, then employ the money to fund public job
creation by financially strapped municipalities and states.

But if progressives can’t get the Conyers bill or comparable legislation
through Congress, should we collectively surrender to the PPP
seduction?  If no other help for the poor and unemployed is available,
if there is no other likely way to fix the aging infrastructure of the
United States, do we need to acquiesce in the private sector controlling
a growing portion of the public sector through higher cost P3s — and at
the cost, it appears, of making a social democratic safety net
increasingly hard to achieve in this country?  To answer this question,
democratic socialists need a remedial crash course on P3s, and soon.

[*Briefs: Virginia elections, trade pact protest, web
lobbying*](http://dsadc.org/briefs-virginia-elections-trade-pact-protest-web-lobbying/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

**Protest Against Fast Track Trade Treaties**

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="1.5208333333333333in"}

The Sierra Club, Communications Workers of America, Moveon.org, European
activists, National Family Farm Coalition, and others demonstrated
against the potential damage of fast-tracking dangerous trade deals
(5/21/2014).  The trade deals include the Trans-Pacific Partnership
(TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP). 
The Sierra Club opposes fast track—an outdated and inappropriate
mechanism for trade pacts as expansive as the TPP and TTIP.  As Michael
Brune, Executive Director of the Sierra Club said of the Camp-Baucus
bill that would allow fast-tracking: “This legislation strips Congress
of its defining democratic characteristic – its check-and-balance
structure.  If Congress is not able to fully debate and, if necessary,
amend the language of these all-encompassing trade pacts, the
environment, our climate, and our families could suffer as a result.” 
Among the dubious trade objectives is one that would allow foreign
investors to sue over local laws that would reduce their profits!  The
Camp-Baucus bill limits transparency to the public and maybe even to the
Congress.

In the rush to do away with trade barriers, these treaties eviscerate
hard won gains of working- and middle-class Americans, Europeans, and
the rest of the world. The trade bills would also undermine unions
internationally and sharply diminish our allies by stopping at borders
the right to information and consultations.

*— Dan Adkins*

**PDA Launches New Web Page Lobbying for H.R 1000**

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

** **

Progressive Democrats of America (PDA) has created a web site to
facilitate citizen lobbying for the Conyers jobs bill H.R. 1000,
according to PDA’s indominable organizer Andrea Miller.  Miller outlined
the workings of the site at a recent meeting held at Conyers’ office on
the Hill.  Among the features of the site are state-by-state lists of
elected officials and their office telephone numbers as well as their
Facebook and Twitter pages.  The site also lists contact information for
major media outlets in each state and includes mix-and-match versions of
pro-jobs legislation letters to the editor that individuals can tailor
to whatever is appropriate for a given legislator or media contact. 
Through “Twitter storms” and personal Facebook pages, Miller explains,
it is possible to reach most legislators even when you don’t live in
their districts, even when their official web sites are designed to
screen out letters from outsiders.   To sample the web site and
determine how best to use it, Miller suggests that supporters of “jobs
for all” legislation contact PDA at
[*www.pdamerica.org*](http://www.pdamerica.org).

 

*– Andy Feeney*

**Instant Runoff Voting in Arlington**

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* Summer 2014**

Parts of Arlington and McLean had a Democratic primary July 6 to replace
a 17-year veteran of Virginia’s House of Delegates.  The House
leadership gave the 48^th^ District less than a week to organize the
primary, which was won by Richard “Rip” Sullivan.  The vote was held in
a caucus with the new provision of using Instant Runoff Voting that had
been adopted by Arlington and Fairfax Democrats in the last year.

Instant runoff voting is a method for ranking candidates in case no
candidate gets over 50% of the vote.  Each voter ranks all or some of
the candidates (1^st^ choice, 2^nd^ choice, and onward).  The candidate
with the least votes is dropped and the sums are recalculated until a
majority winner is found.  See this link for more details
[*http://www.fairvote.org/reforms/instant-runoff-voting/how-instant-runoff-voting-works/*](http://www.fairvote.org/reforms/instant-runoff-voting/how-instant-runoff-voting-works/) 
This form of voting ensures majority rule but eliminates old caucus
methods where voting proceeds long into the night.

On July 5, a candidate debate was organized and six of the seven
candidates characterized themselves as progressives. The seventh
characterized herself as a liberal centrist and received the least votes
in the primary.  The most contentious difference concerned the  effort
to build a streetcar line in South Arlington.  Many are concerned about
the possible increase in the cost of living and short-term costs. 
Another issue could be the increasing lack of affordable housing. 
Although some candidates were open to public private partnerships,
others were concerned that such partnerships are used to privatize
government and turn local government into a private profit center.

The special election for the 48^th^ District of Virginia’s House will be
August 19, 2014.  Sullivan and Republican David Foster will vie for
delegate in this heavily Democratic district.  The new photo ID
requirements will not be in force at this time.

*– Dan Adkins*

[*DC Faces “Crisis in Affordable Housing” Tenants’ Group Warns:
Residents Urged to Support 2 Rent Control Reform
Bills*](http://dsadc.org/dc-faces-crisis-in-affordable-housing-tenants-group-warns-residents-urged-to-support-2-rent-control-reform-bills/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* Summer 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

Low and moderate-income Washington D.C. residents face a “crisis in
affordable housing,” according to a panel of experts who addressed a
June 26 special board meeting of TENAC, the D.C. Tenants Advocacy
Coalition.  The District’s existing rent-control law is badly broken,
housing costs are soaring to levels that many Washingtonians can’t
afford, and many low-income people are being pushed out of the city.

To address the crisis, TENAC chair Jim McGrath and TENAC legislative
affairs coordinators Tom Gregory and Cynthia Pols, Esq. urged tenants at
the meeting to support two rent control reform bills introduced in
mid-June by departing D.C. Council member Jim Graham (Democrat- Ward 1).

TENAC board members and attendees also heard from Jenny Reed, policy
director of the D.C. Fiscal Policy Institute, Elina Bravve, research
analyst of the National Low Income Housing Coalition, and Drew Gossett
of the Episcopalian-run Friendship House in far northwest D.C. on the
depth and scope of the District’s low-income housing dilemmas.   Also
speaking at the event were representatives of several D.C. government
agencies charged with assisting low-income and middle-income residents,
a representative of at-large Council member Anita Bonds, and former
Council member and one-time liberal Republican candidate for mayor Carol
Schwartz.

Schwartz, who was warmly greeted by TENAC chair McGrath and hailed as a
long-time friend of low income housing, said that she retired from
politics a few years ago after a group of wealthy local business owners
organized a PAC to defeat her in the Republican primary, apparently
because of her support for legislation to provide paid sick leave for
all D.C. workers.  The changes the Republican Party has undergone in
recent years mean she can no longer call herself Republican, Schwartz
said, but she is returning to run for mayor as an independent  out of
concern for the District’s “property and its people.  We are giving our
property away and pushing our people out,” Schwartz said.

Schwartz vowed to make low-income housing and the rights of tenants one
of her priority issues if elected, adding:  “I hope you’ll pick me (for
mayor*\[BM1\]* ).  After all, you’ve picked everyone else, tried
everyone else.”   Laughter and some applause greeted this remark.

TENAC legislative affairs coordinators Gregory and Pols, in discussing
Council member Graham’s two rent control reform bills, noted that D.C.’s
existing rent control laws allows landlords to raise rents on most
tenants by an amount equal to the official rise in the cost of living
each year, plus an added 2 percent.  Thanks to the magic of compound
interest, Gregory said, the extra 2 percent essentially blows a hole
through rent control in the District.  In addition, landlords can raise
rents by up to 10 percent in a year when renting out empty units, can
apply for “hardship” exemptions from rent control with relatively little
oversight from the city, and can exceed the rent control rules by
persuading enough of their tenants to sign “voluntary” agreements
allowing this.

Graham’s proposed Rent Control Amendment Act of 2014 (B20-830) and his
Rent Control Improvement and Protection Amendment Act of 2014 (B20-837)
have somewhat overlapping provisions that would at least partly fix
these flaws in the rent control law, according to Pols.

Each bill has the support of Council chair Phil Mendelson and a number
of cosponsors on the Council;  however, B2-830 is bottled up in an
Economic Development Committee chaired by Council member and mayoral
candidate Muriel Bowser, who seems disinclined to release it for a vote
before the full Council.  B20-837 is now before another committee
chaired by Council member Vincent Orange, who so far has not indicated
whether he supports it.

To get the Council to act on rent control reform this year, TENAC’s
leadership is urging all D.C. residents in favor to contact their own
Council members asking them to cosponsor both bills.  To read the
details of the bills, Washingtonians can go to the D.C. Council’s
legislative website at
[*http://lims.dccouncil.us/*](http://lims.dccouncil.us/) and type the
number of the bill desired into the search menu box.

[*Good Reads for midsummer
2014*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-midsummer-2014/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

**The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

**Good Reads leads off with a precis of a *Dollars & Sense* endorsement
of a financial transaction tax as a tool for curbing “casino
capitalism”**

The “financialization” of the U.S. economy since the early 1970s and the
speculation it has given rise to have done real damage to the nation and
the world, the leftwing economics journal *Dollars & Sense* reports in
its May/June 2014 issue.  Although mainstream media have reacted to
Michael Lewis’s recent expose of high-frequency trading, *Flash Boys,*
with debates over what this means for “investors,”  economist and D&S
contributor Doug Orr concludes that what most high-volume Wall Street
traders do is not “investing” at all, but simply high-stakes gambling. 
In short, “The biggest casino in the world is located at the corner of
Wall Street and Broad Street in New York City,” and calling the players
in the New York Stock Exchange investors distorts the truth.   Their
financial gambling, Orr contends, “has become a massive drain of
resources away from the real, productive economy and has made the
overall economy more unstable.”

To rein in the gambling and promote a return to a more healthy and
productive form of capitalism, D&S argues, the U.S. government needs to
undertake several reforms.  One is eliminating tax breaks for
speculative financial activity that make it more lightly taxed than the
incomes of most middle-class American workers.  Another essential step
is reestablishing a 20^th^-century version of the old Glass-Steagall Act
which enforced a separation between speculative investment banking and
ordinary deposit banking for almost six decades, until the Clinton
administration and a Republican Congress joined to repeal it in the
1990s.

The government also needs to enforce the provisions of the existing
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 and
adopt new regulations to curb non-bank speculation involving
“increasingly arcane financial derivatives,” according to the article.
Orr, a professor of economics at City College of San Francisco, also
calls for the White House and Congress to reduce speculation by putting
“a tax on this socially destructive behavior” through some form of
financial transaction tax (FTT).  Unlike the modest 0.5% FTT that
several federal legislators have proposed, however, Orr concludes that
to discourage speculative trading, “the tax should be set at 1% and an
additional tax of 0.1% should be charged on all cancelled orders.”

In a somewhat dissenting article on casino capitalism in the same issue
of *Dollars & Sense*, the Marxist economist Costas Lapavitsas of the
University of London takes some issue with radical U.S. economists  “who
see financialization as the outcome of policy measures, particularly
financial liberalization or deregulation …”  Government policy alone,
Lapavitsas argues, cannot explain all the characteristics of any
“long-lasting era.”  Instead, he attributes the remarkable rise of
financial speculation in the U.S. and global economies since the 1980s
to “a transformation at the deepest level of capitalist accumulation.” 
To Lapavitsas, this in turn can be explained only in terms of “the
deepest material development of capitalism, things like the
technological revolution that has taken place in the last four decades,
the transformation of work, and similarly basic factors of the economy.”

For more on Orr’s and Lapavitsas’s somewhat contrasting accounts of
casino capitalism and the free-market “neoliberalism” that promotes it,
see *Dollars & Sense* at
[*http://www.dollarsandsense.org/archives/2014/0514orr.html*](http://www.dollarsandsense.org/archives/2014/0514orr.html)\
*— Andy Feeney*

**AND LINKS TO OTHER GOOD READS, WITH COME-ONS…**

&gt;&gt;You can read about our event in support of Cecily McMillan in
the newsletter leader; here’s another chance at the clip from the Mike
Malloy Show in which she gets to testify about DSA and its scope:

[*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=im\_nvrIB-Rw&list=UUpU4j-LN\_aibXA1gONvWzxw*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=im_nvrIB-Rw&list=UUpU4j-LN_aibXA1gONvWzxw)

&gt;&gt;How does inequality grow, day to day? Well, one way it happens
is as a result of longstanding changes in welfare policy that
increasingly have discriminated against the unemployed and unmarried.
The NYT’s Tom Edsall outlines the causes and the effect.

[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/opinion/thomas-edsall-cutting-the-poor-out-of-welfare.html?hp&rref=opinion&\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/18/opinion/thomas-edsall-cutting-the-poor-out-of-welfare.html?hp&rref=opinion&_r=0)

&gt;&gt;Sam Pizzigati is a reliable source for regular updates on the
excesses of capitalism that perpetuate inequality. See his IPS blog,
“Too Much,” at [*http://toomuchonline.org/*](http://toomuchonline.org/)
His latest leader is “How Much Wealth Are Our Wealthiest Hiding?” and
the short answer is enough to be prosecuted…

&gt;&gt;The NYT’s Neil Irwin details an “uncomfortable truth about
capitalism” – that governments and megacorps are intimately engaged in a
high-stakes global contest called (eyerolls here) a “free market.” No
particular radical content in this piece, but lots of ammunition…
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/19/upshot/why-were-all-crony-capitalists-like-it-or-not.html?ref=us*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/19/upshot/why-were-all-crony-capitalists-like-it-or-not.html?ref=us)

&gt;&gt;The great biographer of Keynes, Robert Skidelsky, argues that
it’s time to stop teaching the discredited “efficient market”
neoclassical economics in university – and that today’s economics
students know that, and are saying so…
[*http://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/18/economics-upheaval-students-disssent-capitalist-thomas-piketty?CMP=fb\_gu*](http://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/18/economics-upheaval-students-disssent-capitalist-thomas-piketty?CMP=fb_gu)

&gt;&gt;Another from the NYT – the economics writer Eduardo Porter with
a sober roundup of findings about what we can’t change about climate
change.
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/25/business/economy/carbon-cuts-now-wont-stop-climate-change-but-could-limit-damage.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&version=HpSum&module=second-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/25/business/economy/carbon-cuts-now-wont-stop-climate-change-but-could-limit-damage.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&version=HpSum&module=second-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&_r=0)

&gt;&gt;The City Paper’s post-mortem, if that’s the word, on the
amazingly successful Heather Mizeur campaign. Something is going on in
Maryland…
[*http://www.citypaper.com/news/mobtownbeat/bcp-mizeur-makes-a-movement-20140626,0,809568.story*](http://www.citypaper.com/news/mobtownbeat/bcp-mizeur-makes-a-movement-20140626,0,809568.story)

&gt;&gt;Here’s a sidebar to our ongoing discussion on the US socialist
left and how it (we) manage(s) to keep itself (ourselves) divided…
[*http://www.counterpunch.org/2014/07/04/sectarian-delusions-on-the-american-left/*](http://www.counterpunch.org/2014/07/04/sectarian-delusions-on-the-american-left/)

[*Kurzarbeit, the German way to avoid layoffs, gets traction in the
US*](http://dsadc.org/kurzarbeit-the-german-way-to-avoid-layoffs-makes-headway-in-the-us/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

*By Cecilio Morales*

Nebraska became the 29th state in the United States in past weeks to
establish a layoff avoidance work-sharing unemployment insurance
program. Unfortunately, time runs out next month for amending laws to
meet federal requirements and in other respects, including funding, the
U.S. program will begin to wind down through 2015.

Known in Germany as *kurzarbeit* (literally “short work”), the strategy
goes back to German union initiatives in 1985 to increase employment.
Back then it was an outgrowth of earlier measures by socialist
governments in France and Belgium to increase employment by simply
reducing the work week to 35 hours.

In Germany, the initiative came from major companies seeking to avoid
the mass U.S.-style layoffs of the 1980s and ever since. German firms
have had, by law, union representatives on their boards of directors
since the early postwar era. *Kurzarbeit* has been credited with
avoiding in Germany the full slump that hit its neighbors as the 2008
crisis spread through Europe, and with speeding that nation’s economic
recovery, now in full swing.

The original conception is simple. Instead of letting go of 20 workers
in a facility of 100, all 100 get a 20 percent cut in their work hours
and pay; moreover, the German state deems the workers partially
unemployed, thus compensates them accordingly on a pro-rata basis. This
spares the worker the dislocation, psychological drawbacks and family
disruption of job loss; it also assures that the worker’s skills keep up
with the latest in his or her occupation.

Some economists, notably Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for
Microeconomic Analysis Jennifer Hunt, have questioned the value of work
sharing. In a working paper for the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Hunt found that in the 1980s work sharing increased employment
and benefited workers as wages rose; however, she said the growth rate
was smaller than in the United States and there was some loss of output.
In *The Quarterly Journal of Economics*, Hunt speculated that it might
lead employers to seek other “inputs” rather than labor.

However, in the broader policy arena observers ranging from the likes of
Kevin Hassett, from the conservative American Enterprise Institute, to
economist Dean Baker, of the progressive-leaning Center for Economic and
Policy Research, have publicly given high marks to U.S. work sharing.

As a result, the American policy of short-time compensation (STC) is
federal law. In 2012, Congress passed legislation pushed by Sen. Jack
Reed (D-RI) and Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn) to help launch STC programs.
Also, the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act, signed Feb. 22,
2012 by President Obama, includes the Layoff Prevention Act of 2012,
which offers subsidies to states starting STC programs, including \$100
million in grants.

In [*the states that amend their unemployment insurance
laws*](http://www.reed.senate.gov/news/release/reeds-layoff-prevention-law-helps-save-over-950-ri-jobs)
as required for STC, employers may voluntarily arrange to reduce work
hours between 10 and 60 percent and allow workers to claim partial
unemployment insurance. The workers, like any UI claimants, must be
available for other work during those compensated hours and submit to
all the other requirements of unemployment compensation.

The District of Columbia is a participating jurisdiction. Maryland has
an STC program; Virginia as of 2013 does not. Otherwise, the states that
currently have STC programs include the predictable ones: the Northeast
and New England, the Great Lakes states and the entire West Coast. In
the South, only Arkansas and Florida have an STC program. The Southwest
states include Arizona, Colorado, Texas and Oklahoma. The Central states
with STC are Iowa, Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska.

[*Panel, New Bills Raise Hope for Relief For Millions of Long-term
Unemployed*](http://dsadc.org/panel-new-bills-raise-hope-for-relief-for-millions-of-long-term-unemployed/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

** ***By Woody Woodruff* and *Andy Feeney*

As Democrats and Republicans argue over exactly how well President
Obama’s policies are promoting the recovery of American capitalism, the
plight of the long-term unemployed has become a quiet crisis.  Since
December, millions of jobless Americans have been left in desperate
straits because their unemployment compensation has run out and Congress
has failed to renew long-term unemployment insurance benefits. The
number of jobless people affected has now grown to 3.1 million.
 However, there is some hope — a slim one, at least — that a bitterly
divided Congress might possibly address their plight before the fall
elections.

In April, the Senate passed a bill to renew benefits for the long-term
unemployed, but the House gave the bill no consideration. Now a
bipartisan pair of senators, Jack Reed (D) of Rhode Island and Dean
Heller (R) of Nevada, have [*launched a new
attempt*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/06/24/unemployment-extension_n_5525305.html?utm_hp_ref=politics)
to restore the benefit. As of June 28 the two had been joined by
Republican Frank LoBiondo of New Jersey and Dale Kildee, a Michigan
Democrat, who [*introduced a companion bill in the
House*](http://insurancenewsnet.com/oarticle/2014/06/26/lobiondo-kildee-introduce-bipartisan-extension-of-unemployment-benefits-a-522864.html#.U6yxZ7Etc1k).
 Unlike the dead-end Senate bill passed in April, the new House and
Senate bills will not provide back compensation for those whose benefits
were cut off in December.  Instead, a statement from the House sponsors
says it “allows eligible job seekers who were cut-off on December 28,
2013 to continue where they left off in the UI claims process.”

Whether this bipartisan effort to help the long-term unemployed can pass
a bitterly partisan Congress this year is unclear, to say the least.  In
the meantime, Rep. John Conyers of Michigan, a longtime progressive, is
continuing to build support for his proposed , [*“Humphrey-Hawkins Full
Employment and Training
Act”*](http://www.johnconyers.com/hr-1000-humphrey-hawkins-full-employment-and-training-act#.U62bLLEtc1k) of
2014,  a bill that would impose a light financial transaction tax on
Wall Street speculators in order to fund public job creation by state
and local governments in areas where unemployment is especially severe.

As part of his long-term effort to address the plight of the jobless,
Conyers earlier this year sparked the formation of a new House Caucus,
the  *Full Employment Caucus*.  Another initiative sponsored by Conyers’
office was the holding of a panel discussion on the effects and possible
cures of long-term unemployment on June 24 in the Rayburn House Office
Building.  At the event, Conyers told the hundred-plus attendees that
action is needed now to counter the “low pace of employment restoration”
that is damaging the welfare of both individuals and the nation at
large.

At the event, moderator Arthur Delaney of the *Huffington Post*
described his interviews with long-term unemployed and the evident
effects of unemployment on their health and self-confidence, and
recommended German-style job sharing as one remedy for the problem.
  Panelist [*Heidi Shierholz of the Economic Policy
Institute*](http://www.epi.org/publication/truth-todays-long-term-unemployment-crisis/)
agreed that policies to “spread total hours work across more workers”
are a critical element of a broad-gauged package of solutions that also
include renewing the long-term unemployment benefit program and
increasing policies that increase aggregate demand in the economy, such
as more relief to states (rehiring fired teachers, nurses, public safety
workers) and infrastructure restoration spending.

Shierholz vigorously disputed the argument from the right that long-term
benefits are a disincentive to seek work: “The empirical evidence
strongly rejects this concern.” Nor, she said, does long-term
unemployment result in a skills deficit or damage to productivity among
jobless workers – “today’s long-term unemployment crisis is not due to
something wrong with these particular workers.”  Shierholz added that
spending federal funds on jobless benefits, ironically, is one of the
more effective ways of fighting unemployment, since providing money to
jobless workers who will spend it, not save it, stimulates aggregate
consumer demand and job growth. EPI calculations show that the loss of
consumer demand caused by 3.4 million unemployed workers not receiving
jobless benefits, Shierholz added, would itself cost the nation 300,000
jobs.

Panelist Betsey Stevenson, labor economist member of the White House
Council of Economic Advisors, also disputed many of the right wing’s
contentions about joblessness. Because there is empirical evidence that
the long-term unemployed face discrimination in job seeking, she added,
policy moves are required to insure fair treatment by potential
employers of jobless workers who are victims of “bad luck and hard
times.” Stevenson said the White House has demonstrated to certain
businesses that their own HR departments are discriminating against the
long-term unemployed and that the administration is pressuring such
employers to improve their practices.

The professional social network LinkedIn, Stevenson said, has just
released a [*jobseeker
application*](http://blog.linkedin.com/2014/06/19/new-job-search-mobile-app/)
to improve access to opportunities as they are posted. There was no
discussion by the panel on how many long-term unemployed had access to
smartphones.

As for the government promoting economic policies that can restore rapid
growth in job creation, Stevenson suggested in the event’s question and
answer session, the options that Obama administration faces are limited.
 Three major factors make for slow growth in job creation at present:
“Recovery from a financial crisis is always slow and difficult;” also,
the US since 2009 has seen an “unprecedented” loss in jobs with state
and local government, and finally the Baby Boomers are retiring, which
reduces consumer demand and hurts job creation.  Despite some political
resistance, Stevenson suggested, the Obama administration is working to
“make sure this is a fair recovery,” notably by supporting a higher
minimum wage and the availability of pre-school programs for all
American children.

Another way that the Obama White House is trying to make progress on
long-term unemployment, Stevenson said, is through the forging of
public-private partnerships.  Examples include the “Skills for Chicago
and the Future” program that has been expanding the training and the
skills of jobless workers in Chicago, as well as the federal
government’s funding of “ready to work partnerships” under the
Department of Labor’s H1B program, in which businesses receive support
for providing jobless workers with paid internships and paid work
experience.

One White House goal, Stevenson said, is to “work with businesses that
have signed the pledge” to help jobless workers, “to find out what works
and what doesn’t.”

Panelist Judy Conti, of the National Employment Law Project, pointed out
that the biggest crisis overall is that “there aren’t enough jobs and
enough people filling those jobs.”  The plight of the long-term jobless
is only part of the crisis, Conti said: “less than half of the
unemployed \[overall\] are getting benefits” at this point.  Her
organization has not given up on the fight to reauthorize long-term
unemployment benefits, Conti said, but the focus has been on trying to
get people back to work.  There is surprising bipartisan agreement that
getting people back to work is important, she added, but one problem is
how to fund this.  People on the left tend to want to finance job
creation and unemployment benefits through tax reforms that increase
costs to business:  “people on the right tend to favor reducing spending
… often on other programs helping low income people.”

Conti joined the panel consensus on the need for spending on
infrastructure recovery and resumption of aid to states that has been
cut through sequestration, to re-employ laid-off teachers and other
public employees.  She said the latter measure alone would cut the
unemployment rate by one percent. And she noted that the automation of
corporate hiring practices through Internet applications and Internet
applicant screening is discriminating against the long-term unemployed
with screening software that bumps those with low credit scores.  This
is “a horrible Catch-22” for many long-term jobless who have hard times
paying their bills, since the longer these workers remain unemployed,
the worse their credit ratings tend to become; and the worse their
credit ratings become, the harder they find it to obtain work.

Along with Stevenson, Conti called for public-private partnerships as
one tool in fighting long-term unemployment, and she urged “employers to
train hiring managers to overcome subconscious biases against unemployed
workers.” The NELP furnished a position paper at the panel event,
[*“Tackling the Long-term Unemployment
Crisis”*](http://www.nelp.org/page/-/UI/2014/Issue-Brief-Tackling-Long-Term-Unemployment-Crisis.pdf?nocdn=1),
that details many of the proposals Conti brought to the panel.

Also scheduled to speak on the June 24 panel, but unable to attend for
health reasons, was Michael R. Strain, of the moderate conservative
American Enterprise Institute (AEI).  Strain is the author of a Winter
2014 article in *National Affairs* entitled “A Jobs Agenda for the
Right,” which argues strongly that the job destruction effects of the
recent “Great Recession” are haunting the economy still.
[*http://www.nationalaffairs.com/publications/detail/a-jobs-agenda-for-the-right*](http://www.nationalaffairs.com/publications/detail/a-jobs-agenda-for-the-right)

Defined broadly, Strain argues in this article, the real unemployment
rate last November was 13.2 percent, “more than four percentage points
higher than it was at the beginning of the Great Recession,” and the
effects of such high unemployment amount to a “human catastrophe.”

* *The employment crisis is one of the most important problems now
facing the U.S., and “none of our elected leaders can afford to ignore
it,” Strain’s article continues. “Yet both parties are more or less
doing that,” with Republicans being even worse than Democrats at simply
ignoring the problem and the “ambitious policy solutions” needed to
address it.

Several of Strain’s proposed fixes for unemployment and long-term
unemployment, as outlined in his *National Affairs* article, are
anathema to most liberals, not to mention the nation’s small but
steadily growing band of democratic socialists.  For example, he
suggests at one point accepting a “sub-minimum wage” for some job
categories to bolster hiring, with the federal government then
subsidizing the workers receiving such a wage by bolstering their
incomes, probably through the earned income tax credit.  Conti at the
June 24 panel discussion vehemently rejected any idea of the
“sub-minimum” wage being a solution.

* *However, political progressives are likely to welcome some of
Strain’s other suggestions, including his heretical support for the
Federal Reserve’s “quantitative easing” (QE) policies and the notion of
“carefully targeted infrastructure spending.”

* *According to Strain, “Many conservatives have criticized QE, but
unfairly so,” since there is reason to think that QE has stimulated
demand in the housing market and created more jobs for construction
workers, while arguably having a “positive effect on the economy as a
signal in and of itself of the Fed’s commitment to a strong labor
market.”

Although Strain did not speak at the June 24 event, all the other
panelists bemoaned the congressional gridlock that has kept new federal
money out of the workforce equation.

As moderator Delaney recalled, the first opponent of long-term
unemployment compensation renewal was former Sen. Jim Bunning, who
initially earned some enmity even from Republican colleagues for his
intransigence in blocking the funding of renewed long-term jobless
benefits. Now, Delaney acknowledged, Bunning’s callous disregard of the
long-term jobless has become Republican gospel, meaning the House is
likely to be a constant barrier to renewed benefits for these workers.

Present at the June 24 panel event were two local DSA members as well as
a representative of the National Jobs for All Coalition (NJFAC). The
latter group, which like DSA has made passage of Conyers’ HR 1000 a
priority, has worked with the Congressional Full Employment Caucus to
co-host a July 9 -10 strategy briefing on building a national movement
for full employment.

See [*www.njfac.org*](http://www.njfac.org/)  for more details and
updates on the national strategy session. An archived live-stream of
some of the session is at
[*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LfaqVIx6vaU*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LfaqVIx6vaU)

[*Piketty, Schniketty… and other
inevitabilities*](http://dsadc.org/piketty-schniketty-and-other-inevitabilities/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

*Capital in the Twenty-First Century* has taken the world of political
economy by storm.  The masterwork by French economist Thomas Piketty on
the rise in wealth inequality has been applauded both for the depth of
its research and the incisiveness of its conclusions.  Leftists, in
particular, see the book as a potent weapon in the war against
privilege.

While many political activists and academics recognized the depth of
Piketty’s achievement as soon as his book hit the stands, another group
of opinion-makers is just beginning to appreciate the man and his work. 
These are, of course, the headline writers.  The start of what is
certain to be a flood of headlines making sport of the name “Piketty”
began in the July issue of In *These Times*, with an article by Chris
Lehmann entitled “Piketty and Meatballs” – the “meatballs” of the title
being critics who misunderstand the book, which, to be fair, is rather
dense reading and not exactly *Inequality for Dummies*.

The ITT headline would be cuter if the middle syllable of Piketty’s name
was stressed (Pi-KET-ty), thereby sounding like a toddler’s
pronunciation of “spaghetti.”  But Piketty, in fact, pronounces his name
“PEEK-et-tee,” stressing the first syllable.

So headline writers have yet to really get started writing suitably
amusing puns on Piketty’s name.  Therefore, as a service to journalism,
I freely offer the following headlines that could be used above features
on Piketty from a variety of perspectives.  My only condition is that
publications who use any of these NOT attribute them to me.

**Piketty, Piketty**!  *Critics attack details of landmark study,
overlook big picture*

**Piketty and Shovel: ** *Burying arguments of capitalism’s
“rationality”*

**Piketty, Dickety, Dock: ** *Kuznets was a crock*

**Piketty (De)Fence: ** *Author answers conservative critics*

**Piketty and Choosing: ** *Is* Capital *author too selective in use of
facts?*

**Piketty Knows: ** *Erudite author puts his finger on the boogieman of
inequality*

[*Sprawl and the Quest for Status: a book
review*](http://dsadc.org/sprawl-and-the-quest-for-status-a-book-review/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

Review of *Dead End:  Suburban Sprawl and the Rebirth of American
Urbanism*.  By Benjamin Ross.  Oxford University Press, 2014, 249 pp.

 

The subject of suburban sprawl is already the focus of a semi-genre of
books that have decried the soullessness, ugliness and environmental
destructiveness of unchecked exurban development.  Authors such as Jane
Holtz Kay, James Howard Kunstler and Daniel Lazare have built on each
other’s works to build a case for urban living, “smart growth” and
transit-oriented communities, and against the housing subdivisions,
office parks and shopping malls that have spread across the landscape
like kudzu in the years following the Second World War.  Nevertheless,
these critics have been mostly on the losing end of a 70-year war battle
against sprawl.

With *Dead End:  Suburban Sprawl and the Rebirth of American Urbanism,*
Ben Ross has joined the ranks of sprawl’s critics, although he himself
lives in the suburbs – albeit the relatively urbanized Montgomery
County, Md.  Ross, an environmental scientist by trade (and who was at
one time affiliated with DSA), was moved to write his book after many
years of advocacy for Maryland’s proposed light-rail “Purple Line” that
would connect many of the closer-in Montgomery and Prince George’s
County communities.  Ross draws from his experiences – as well as from
an impressive body of research – to produce a highly readable historical
study of the origins of urban sprawl, why it has been so hard to limit
over the past decades, and how a changing political landscape might be
turning the tide against sprawl.

Ross covers much of the ground already sown by earlier critics of
suburbia, but he adds an original contribution to the literature:  the
extent to which the growth of suburbs has been driven by suburbanites’
desire to gain and protect social status.  The earliest advocates of
suburbanization, such as French utopian socialist Charles Fourier, were
driven by concern for workers crowded into unhealthy tenements during
the Industrial Revolution – and even Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
called for the “abolition of the distinction between town and country.” 
However, once suburbs took off in the late 19^th^ century, they quickly
became bastions of wealth and privilege – and whiteness.

Ross credits Frederick Law Olmstead, the late-19^th^-century landscape
architect, as being the father of the modern park-like suburb, as seen
in his plan for Riverside, Ill., with its winding streets, houses set
back from the curb, and plentiful greenery.  Olmstead’s work came before
the auto age, and his suburbs revolved around rail stations, making them
necessarily small and relatively compact, with a modest commercial
district near the station.  Decades later, the coming of the car
unmoored suburbs from public transportation, making possible the rise of
subdivisions containing nothing but housing, where residents might have
to drive miles for a quart of milk.

Olmstead also was architect of the covenant, a restrictive clause
attached to a house’s deed that placed conditions on use of the
property.  Early covenants contained language banning commercial
activities in the home and requiring payments to homeowners’
associations.  The early 20^th^ century saw the rise of covenants
banning racial and ethnic minorities from owning properties in certain
communities; these were mostly used to keep out blacks, but some
covenants also excluded “Jews …Italians, Greeks and Slavs.”

Covenants, in Ross’ analysis, were one leg of a three-legged stool used
by suburban  nimbys – a neologism derived from the phrase “not in my
backyard” – to keep unwanted people and property uses out of their
neighborhoods.  The other two legs were zoning and historic
preservation.  Zoning built on covenants by putting the muscle of local
government behind land-use restrictions, while historic preservation
laws have been abused by “\[n\]imbys who pose as preservationists,”
speaking “of why they like the old building, when their real passion is
dislike of the new one.”  And, of course, the cost of upscale suburban
development has effectively excluded persons of modest means.

The resistance of suburbanites – and many urbanites as well – to changes
in their surroundings have often been attributed to concern about
property values.  Ross, however, argues that these homeowners often
undercut the values of their own properties by opposing denser
development, especially high-end apartments and retail, that would make
surrounding tracts more valuable.  Likewise, zoning, covenants and
historic preservation place limits on homeowners’ use of their
properties, thereby undercutting their value.  The nimbys’ real
motivation, Ross says, is to preserve their status as persons of
privilege by keeping “less prestigious people and activities out of
their neighborhoods.”

While the quest for status fueled the rise of suburbs, Ross argues, it
has sometimes had an upside for cities as well.  As far back as the
1920s, certain subcultures have rebelled against the sterility and
isolation of suburbs, and Jane Jacobs’ seminal 1961 book *The Death and
Life of Great American Cities* gave urban living a new cachet. 
Bohemians, artists, and political radicals have long embraced the
vitality, density and diversity of cities – ironically leading many
counter-cultural enclaves to become magnets for affluent status seekers
who proceed to gentrify their neighborhoods.  Once funky locales such as
Haight-Ashbury in San Francisco as well as several DC neighborhoods (the
U St. corridor is one example) become the stomping grounds for new
urbanites who embrace their neighborhood’s bohemian reputation while
choking it to death with their un-bohemian lifestyles.

Status-seeking certainly has had a role in suburban and urban
development, although I think Ross gives it greater weight than it
deserves – compared to the quest for corporate profit, which has been
the biggest driver of suburban growth.  Developers acquire cheap land in
the suburbs, lobby governments to build and expand highways to and
through their properties (supposedly to relieve congestion on existing
roads), and then make big profits from building housing, offices and
shopping malls.  They then move farther out, and repeat.  Ross does not
ignore this, and he explore the role of a broad coalition of
right-wingers – funded by the Kochs and Mellons, given an intellectual
sheen by conservative think tanks such as the Heritage Foundation and
Cato Institute, and joined by the Tea Party – to fight back against
limits on suburban growth, with some success.  The urban growth boundary
adopted by Portland, Ore., has been a specific target of the right’s
ire, but the limits have thus far survived efforts to overturn them. Yet
Ross ascribes this backlash to fears of single-family homeowners being
robbed of “their privileged place in the residential pecking order” more
than to corporations angry about being told where they can and can’t
build.

Ross offers many of the same solutions as other critics of suburbia: 
better public transportation, denser development, removing subsidies for
drivers and limiting parking.  He does, however, frame his solutions
within the context of expanded democracy – of the need to overturn “snob
zoning” with true public control of development.  “The principle of one
person, one vote must replace the restricted voting of suburban land
tenure,” he writes.

He goes beyond mere policy solutions to also offer political strategy,
based on his experiences with Maryland’s Purple Line.  The potential
exists, he believes, for a pro-urban, anti-sprawl coalition of
environmentalists, transit advocates, promoters of low-cost housing and,
yes, developers seeking to profit from the opportunities that smart
growth makes possible.

The future of cities and suburbs is still being written, as is the fate
of Ross’s beloved Purple Line – which, although it has cleared many
political and bureaucratic hurdles, has yet to break ground.  Yet with
growing concern over global warming and climate change, the need to
address the environmental impact of the car and car-dependent suburbs
has never been greater.  *Dead End* adds a valuable resource to this
effort.

[*Supreme Court Majority Rulings: More Rights for Corporations, Fewer
Rights for Women and
Labor*](http://dsadc.org/supreme-court-majority-rulings-more-rights-for-corporations-fewer-rights-for-women-and-labor-2/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* Summer 2014**

** ***By Kurt Stand*

After home health workers successfully organized in Illinois, their
wages increased, they had opportunities for skill-training previously
lacking, and they were able to get health care coverage previously
unavailable.  None of that was of interest to the majority of Supreme
Court justices, however, who ruled in *Harris v. Quinn* that they were
not “full-fledged public employees,” thus could not be required to pay
dues.  The result, for unions in that sector, will be a massive loss of
revenue, making it more difficult to organize and represent a group of
workers who already are hard-placed to assert their rights.

Workers impacted by that ruling are overwhelmingly women and comprise
the working poor.  The Supreme Court’s decision in *Burwell v. Hobby
Lobby* and *Conestoga Wood Specialties v.* *Burwell* specifically
impacted women, by allowing categories of for-profit corporations to
refuse to allow their employees contraceptive coverage in their health
plans.  The result puts a further burden on women, especially those
least able to afford any additional expense.

The consequence of each decision, with those who sit in comfort
rejecting or making decisions that harm those who have fewer resources
is a commentary on the political direction of our times.  As many have
noted too, this is another instance in which the “family-friendly”
rhetoric of the conservative right is contradicted by the anti-woman
social polices they put in place.  And each decision was political,
reflecting an agenda that, since Reagan’s presidency, has been pushed by
all three branches of the federal government whenever the opportunity
has presented itself.

Although the Court majority was careful in both cases to not make as
sweeping a decision as they might have done, in neither case as sweeping
as they might have been, both the Harris and Hobby Lobby cases represent
a chipping away of previously established rights and practices and open
the door for further limitations on women’s reproductive rights, and
workers’ labor rights.  Moreover, Hobby Lobby’s restriction on an
Affordable Care Act mandate represents a further step in limiting the
federal government’s ability to protect vulnerable parts of the
population, while the logic behind the Harris decision marks a step
toward reducing the ability of unions to engage in political action. 
The vigorous dissents of Ruth Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan
notwithstanding, the Court majority has been building a set of
precedents that threaten the entire legal edifice of pre-existing social
and labor programs, and of protection of civil and women’s rights.

Service Employees International Union (SEIU) President Mary Kay Henry
spoke to that danger in a press release decrying the Hobby Lobby
decision:  “The Court’s decisions today will cause real harm to the
physical and economic health of America’s women workers and their
families. Beyond that, the decisions may open the door to even broader
attacks on preventive healthcare and also basic workplace rights,
including freedom from gender discrimination or the right to unite
together in a union.”

The restrictions on those rights stand in contrast to the Supreme
Court’s extension of corporate rights.  The logic of the Court’s grant
of free speech rights to corporations in its Citizens United ruling is
evident in the recent cases too – which was the focus of a statement
issued by National Nurses Union (NNU) Executive Director Rose Ann
DeMoro, “The goal of the anti-union crowd is to disempower the ability
of nurses and other healthcare workers to speak out for patient and
public safety on everything from food inspections to a healthier
environment to safer health care settings.”  She then added, with
specific reference to the Hobby Lobby decision for its direct attack on
women’s health:  “Increasingly we see this court cynically manipulating
the tradition of free speech to further expand the power of corporations
over all segments of public life,” said DeMoro. “From decisions that
money equals free speech, which especially benefits large corporate
interests to protecting corporations from consumer challenges to
anti-union decisions, the First Amendment has been steadily corrupted by
this court.”

These decisions those go to a core divide in US society – who has the
freedom to choose, to act.  The implication of these decisions and of
the overall corporate/conservative agenda is that liberty and power
should reside in those with wealth.  Business can determine who gets (or
doesn’t get) health care, business can determine who works (or doesn’t),
for how much and for how long.  It is a direction that is profoundly
undemocratic socially, yet at the same time is profoundly hostile to
individual freedom — for it is women’s individual right to control her
own body, it is health care worker’s individual ability to attain a
secure standard of living that these decisions call into question.  The
Supreme Court’s actions should serve as a reminder that only through
broad democratic participation and control over political and economic
institutions, only through broad and universal social provisions, can
individual liberty be maintained.  Preventing such assaults on popular
rights will require, in the months and years ahead, renewed organizing,
public action and electoral action aimed not only at challenging the
specific policies now being imposed, but also the ideological and
political climate that allows these to take place.  The question to be
answered in our society: democracy and freedom for the few or for us
all?

[*Ukraine and the Czars*](http://dsadc.org/ukraine-and-the-czars/)

Sunday, July 13th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; Summer 2014**

*By Dan Adkins*

The political and cultural history of Russia and Eastern Europe has
limited Ukraine’s experiment with democracy.  The Czar’s and the
Soviet’s absolutist legacy has minimized local governance and citizen
initiative.  Ukraine leaders, like Russia’s, appoint the heads of its
states, thus consolidating power at the top and minimizing local
representation.  This lack of civic dynamism contributes to the current
problems by hiding differences unless there is open revolt, dodging the
messy democratic process of resolving differences in the public sphere. 
The privilege of national power may also figure in the economic
corruption that has infected both Russia and Ukraine.  An irony of the
East and West during the cold War was that in the West you could
disparage the government but not your foreman.  In the East you could
disparage your foreman but not the government.  Limiting criticism of
your government only allows differences to fester and maybe leaves
leaders free to focus on their own advantage instead of serving the
people.

Another issue in Ukraine is its potential relationship with the European
Union (E.U.).  Given what E.U. austerity has done to southern Europe,
some have to ask why join it.  One answer is that such a move may limit
corruption and thus eventually allow the economy and democracy to grow.
 What has been played up is the political differences between Ukraine’s
East and West.  Ukraine’s East is not only more Russian culturally and
historically, but its business is more with Russia.  Ukraine’s defense
industry in the East is still providing material and services with
Russia’s military.  Otherwise they would shut down.

Russia’s role in Ukraine suggests a focus not readily understood. 
Russia’ breaking treaties and grabbing Crimea has made some in Sweden
and Finland nervous and consider joining NATO.  The reaction by a senior
advisor to Putin was: “Finland should think of the consequences, if it
ponders joining NATO.  It must ask could joining start World War III?”
 This advisor also called the E.U. colonies of the U.S.  Some in Russia
seem to believe the Ukraine problem is a U.S. plot.

Russia and the U.S. see themselves as uniquely important world leaders. 
Some of us think we are so important that we only see other “world
leaders” as the actors.  This Czar-like self-aggrandizement has affected
both the U.S. and Russian self-image while smaller countries like
Vietnam, Afghanistan, and Iraq have to teach us humility.  Let’s hope we
all learn humility soon.  We will not be able to see the world viably
until we can see all the actors.  Until we see all the actors we cannot
find or imagine viable policy.
