***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from April 2016 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Farewell to women in Maryland’s congressional
races*](http://dsadc.org/farewell-to-women-in-marylands-congressional-races/)

Saturday, April 30th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2016**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

Election night in Maryland was a downer to those who had supported
progressive women candidates in their primary campaigns.

In her concession speech to Chris Van Hollen on April 26, US Senate
candidate [*Donna
Edwards*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/md-politics/heres-what-donna-edwards-said-after-she-lost-her-senate-bid-in-maryland/2016/04/27/b929cd08-0c30-11e6-8ab8-9ad050f76d7d_story.html)
noted that Maryland voters had chosen an all-male, nearly all-white
slate of Democratic candidates to stand election for Congress in
November.  She lamented particularly that black women were denied a
voice, saying:

“What I want to know from my Democratic Party is, when will the voices­
of people of color, when will the voices of women, when will the voices
of labor, when will the voices of black women, when will our voices be
effective, legitimate equal leaders in a big-tent party?”

Edwards, who had emphasized her gender and African American race during
her campaign, raised her own voice to say, “My friends, this is the
21st-century question for the Democratic Party, and it is time for the
Democratic Party to call the question.”

Another progressive candidate, [*Joseline
Peña-Melnyk*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/joseline-pena-melnyk-for-congress/2016/03/12/598d3c94-e7bf-11e5-a6f3-21ccdbc5f74e_story.html),
from College Park, lost her bid to replace Edward in the 4^th^ District
for House of Representatives, placing third behind Anthony Brown and
Glenn Ivey.  Peña-Melnyk, who is Afro-Dominican, is a three-term
Maryland delegate and a champion of labor, women’s rights, and criminal
justice reform.  She served as a prosecutor, defense attorney, and
College Park council woman before running for the Assembly seat – a seat
she can fortunately keep now.  Two years ago, she led the formation of
the Latino Caucus in the Maryland Assembly.

Peña-Melnyk’s challengers, both African American, had better name
recognition and funding than she did.  Probably more important, they are
both well ensconced in the powerful Maryland Democratic Party machine. 
Brown, from Baltimore, was Lt. Governor under former Governor Martin
O’Malley, and Ivey was States Attorney in Prince George’s County until
recently.

Maryland has elected only eight women — five Democrats and three
Republicans — to Congress since 1941, including retiring US Senator
Barbara Mikulski, who was elected in 1986.  Donna Edwards was elected to
the House in 2008, and she has been a vocal advocate for women,
low-income and minority constituents, and labor.  During the Occupy
encampment in Lafayette Park, Edwards was reported as being the only
member of Congress to meet with Occupy folks and hear their concerns.

Van Hollen, a moderate Democrat who is a Party favorite, will more than
likely win Mikulski’s Senate seat in November, and Anthony Brown will
more than likely win Donna Edwards’ US House seat.  Brown ran a
lackluster and losing campaign against Maryland Republican Governor
Larry Hogan three years ago.  Lost will be two exceptional women of
color to the US Senate and House.

[*Good Reads for
Socialists*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-7/) May 2016

Saturday, April 30th, 2016

GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2016**

One of the longer authors’ lists around… a cross-section of left
thinkers co-signs a letter on the next steps. Saskia Sassen, Bill
Fletcher Jr., Gar Alperovitz, Noam Chomsky and Barbara Epstein are just
a few. From *Znet* via *Portside.*

[*http://portside.org/2016-04-09/possible-ideas-going-forward*](http://portside.org/2016-04-09/possible-ideas-going-forward)

National vice-chair Joe Schwartz’s latest, from *Jacobin*: “Socialism
isn’t the negation of liberalism. It’s the realization of liberal values
made impossible by capitalism.”
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/04/jonathan-chait-nymag-marxism-democratic-socialists/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/04/jonathan-chait-nymag-marxism-democratic-socialists/)

Our DC comrade David Schwartzman, who has spoken to our membership
meetings on the topic of climate change and capitalism, has a tight
piece about the good news/bad news scenario of renewables (wind and
solar) becoming aspects of industrial big capital. It’s from CNS Web –
“an online community of red-green activists”

[*http://www.cnsjournal.org/green-capitalism-builds-big-solar-should-we-throw-the-baby-out-with-the-bathwater/*](http://www.cnsjournal.org/green-capitalism-builds-big-solar-should-we-throw-the-baby-out-with-the-bathwater/)

Recycling is viewed as part of a virtuous circle, lowering resource use
and providing social bonds and values. In a global capitalist
environment, though, it’s tough for recycling to escape the trappings of
exploitation and profiteering. This article appeared more or less
simultaneously in *Mother Jones*, The *Oregonian* newspaper and in
several industry publications including *FairWarning: News of Safety,
Health and Corporate Conduct,* to which we link here:
[*http://www.fairwarning.org/2016/04/recycling/*](http://www.fairwarning.org/2016/04/recycling/)

Here’s a well-stated reprise of what many people have developed/worked
through about the kind of mental condition that is the natural outcome
of today’s late capitalism – the social disease of imposed individualism
leading to self-blame. It’s from the *Medium* website and was spotted
because of a Facebook post from our Gotham comrade Rosa Squillacote.
[*https://medium.com/@joe\_brewer/the-mental-disease-of-late-stage-capitalism-4a7bb2a1411c\#.a2a7ghe1a*](https://medium.com/@joe_brewer/the-mental-disease-of-late-stage-capitalism-4a7bb2a1411c#.a2a7ghe1a)

Your compiler is not a regular reader of the Daily Kos blog nor of its
eponymous blogger, so others may not find this
build-the-party-from-inside perspective as interesting. It’s on the
occasion of the Acela primary outcomes. The point about focusing
down-ballot seems worth a look.
[*http://m.dailykos.com/stories/1520509*](http://m.dailykos.com/stories/1520509)

A nice, comprehensive *Guardian* piece about neoliberalism (touting a
new book on the same subject) by Georges Monbiot. Solid historical
approach though the emphasis on personalities behind the theory kind of
masks the fact that capitalism’s dynamic is the driver of neoliberalism
and keeps the zombie walking.
[*http://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot?CMP=fb\_gu*](http://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot?CMP=fb_gu)

A piece from *TruthOut* on a third-party scenario building from the
Sanders campaign. Metro DC member Carolyn Byerly, professor of
communications at Howard University, notes an interesting aspect well
into the discussion: how to create an alternative communication
structure that bypasses the cost of mainstream media.
[*http://www.truth-out.org/opinion/item/35644-how-sanders-could-lay-the-foundation-for-a-third-us-political-party*](http://www.truth-out.org/opinion/item/35644-how-sanders-could-lay-the-foundation-for-a-third-us-political-party)

Our comrade Cecilio Morales like this one from *Quartz* –  kind of
exo-politics, as he implies, but explaining and understanding are not
always the same…
[*http://qz.com/656159/the-scientific-way-to-train-white-people-to-stop-being-racist/*](http://qz.com/656159/the-scientific-way-to-train-white-people-to-stop-being-racist/)

Astra Taylor, author of The People’s Platform, has a discussion of the
comparative narrowness of “activism” and the kinds of engagements that
surround and extend it. Posted from *The Baffler* by XDIR Maria Svart in
late April.
[*http://thebaffler.com/salvos/against-activism*](http://thebaffler.com/salvos/against-activism)

*Jacobin* fave enviro author Alyssa Battistoni on demanding a “Red
environmentalism” future. We say correctly that we can’t envision life
in actual socialism; it’s on the other side of here and now. But we can
imagine our future surroundings stripped of financialism and
propertarianism, and that’s a good start.
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/04/earth-day-climate-change-environment-socialism-resources/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/04/earth-day-climate-change-environment-socialism-resources/)

The origins and nuances of Black Lives Matter as traced by Jelani Cobb
in *The New Yorker*:
 [*http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/03/14/where-is-black-lives-matter-headed*](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/03/14/where-is-black-lives-matter-headed)

Science fiction as fact. Marcia Angell parses the (all too lethal)
intersectionality of human practices from poor population management to
poor carbon management in *American Prospect*.
[*http://prospect.org/article/our-beleaguered-planet-0*](http://prospect.org/article/our-beleaguered-planet-0)

The post-Sanders development of the US left will not come from the
campaign, one Occupy veteran tells Kate Aronoff, but from movements. The
author, in *Rolling Stone*, concludes “If a small-s socialism really is
rising in America, it will look different than any form we’ve yet seen
around the world.”
[*http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/whats-the-future-of-bernie-sanders-political-revolution-20160425*](http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/whats-the-future-of-bernie-sanders-political-revolution-20160425)

[*MARYLAND LEGISLATORS DON’T FAIL TO DISAPPOINT: “BUSINESS-FRIENDLY” IS
NOT JUST A
SLOGAN*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-legislators-dont-fail-to-disappoint-business-friendly-is-not-just-a-slogan/)

Saturday, April 30th, 2016

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2016**

*By Woody Woodruff*

The Maryland General Assembly’s 2016 session offered the usual
combination of high (sometimes manufactured) drama and proof of a
business-dominated legislature whose sessions entertain, and then reject
or disembowel, proposals meant to help redress the balance in favor of
working people, consumers and the poor. Corporate capital, even at this
level, calls the tune.

Several big disappointments put a damper on some significant progressive
victories as the Assembly wrapped its 2016 work at midnight Monday,
April 11. A [*last-minute hostage
situation*](http://marylandreporter.com/2016/04/12/tax-cuts-paid-sick-leave-fail-in-final-hours-but-hundreds-of-bills-enacted/)
left two critically important bills hanging and unpassed – a sweeping
tax package that would have harnessed the state and federal Earned
Income Tax Credit (EITC) to broaden support for working people, and a
requirement for employers to provide earned sick leave for up to 700,000
now-vulnerable Marylanders, many low-income. Both had been top
priorities of progressive organizations during the session. Their joint
demise on the last day of the session meant that the two most
potentially far-reaching improvements in the lives of low-income workers
were put off for at least another year.

The Senate leadership’s push to add tax breaks for the wealthy to the
EITC package led it to keep the earned sick leave bill, which had been
passed by the House, trapped in a Senate committee, and both failed at
midnight in the endgame. As Progressive Maryland organizer [*Justin Vest
wrote*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/assembly_session_a_reminder_that_power_still_favors_the_wealthy),
“lawmakers certainly didn’t disappoint at disappointing Maryland’s most
vulnerable residents.”

“The session started out strong,” Vest continued, “with the Democratic
majority overriding six of Governor Hogan’s vetoes from the 2015 session
including one that returned the right to vote to 40,000 formerly
incarcerated people, making them eligible to vote in the April 26th
primary. But despite positive messages from both chambers, politics as
usual got in the way of what stood to be a historic session.”

Progressives [*could enjoy modest
victories*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-sine-die-20160412-story.html)
on a big criminal justice package that will cut jail populations and
ease sentencing constraints for nonviolent offenses, as well as a police
accountability package that will let civilians be a part of police
misconduct trials, where previously abusive officers were only judged by
other department members.

The police accountability bill went down to the wire with constant
pressure from police to weaken the role of civilians in a reformed
process. “We were wrestling to protect pieces of the police bill up
until around 10 p.m.” the final night, said Larry Stafford, Progressive
Maryland’s executive director.

Several big environmental bills passed with wide support, raising the
bar for [*the state’s shift to renewable energy
resources*](http://marylandclimatecoalition.org/2016-landmark-year-climate-action-clean-energy-maryland/)
and the jobs and economic development that would – or should – accompany
that shift. And the legislature sent the governor a protection for some
of the hardest and most threatened workers around – literally, the
“worker bees” – against [*lethal neonicotinoid
toxins*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/blog/bal-bee-advocates-victorious-in-general-assembly-20160407-story.html)
in agricultural and consumer lawn and garden products, associated with
colony collapse.

Few bills made it through the process without tough fights to prevent
weakening by advocates for the business sector, mostly but hardly all
from the Republican side. The tax breaks for the wealthy that appeared
to have sunk both the EITC package and the paid sick leave bill were
supported by the Senate’s Democratic leadership and touted as [*making
the state more “business
friendly,”*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/increasing_inequality_not_reducing_it)
a mantra also of GOP Gov. Larry Hogan. For the Assembly’s leadership,
business-friendly has meant business-captured when push comes to shove.

The lawmakers were therefore enthusiastic about another tax break,
nearly \$40 million for defense megacorp Northrop Grumman to soothe the
company’s hints about leaving the state. Even Republicans cringed about
“corporate welfare” and Del. Jimmy Tarlau (D-47) said he couldn’t find
any job creation in the bill (according to a tweet from the *Sun*’s
Pamela Wood)… but it passed with near-unanimity.

“Advocates have been fighting as part of the [*Working Matters
coalition*](https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?tab=cm#inbox/1541ab0b52ce928d)
for four years to win paid sick days for the 700,000 uncovered Maryland
workers,” Vest wrote in his [*session
wrap*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/assembly_session_a_reminder_that_power_still_favors_the_wealthy).
“Fearful of a veto by a first-year governor, some members of the General
Assembly thought it best to punt on the issue until now. The bill passed
the House with a solid majority for the first time ever. The bill was
poised to come out of the Senate committee, but the last-minute vote was
canceled when it became clear that [*a tax package loaded up with
goodies*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/md-politics/why-tax-relief--and-sick-leave--died-in-annapolis-this-year/2016/04/24/be9e1860-04e8-11e6-a12f-ea5aed7958dc_story.html)
for corporations and the very wealthy was falling apart.

“That same tax package did include one important component for
progressives – expansions to the state [*Earned Income Tax
Credit*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/increasing_inequality_not_reducing_it).
The changes would have allowed younger workers ages 18 to 24 to benefit
from the credit along with workers without dependents. The EITC is
already one of the most effective anti-poverty policies in existence,
enjoying broad bipartisan support including President Barack Obama and
Speaker Paul Ryan. Approximately 240,000 Maryland workers would have
benefited from the expansion by seeing the average tax credit increase
from \$74 to \$375. That money would have gone directly back into the
local economy, but a policy benefitting workers without also providing
handouts to the wealthy wasn’t seen as a priority by those in power.

“ … the legislature did come together to pass a [*comprehensive criminal
justice reform
package*](http://cnsmaryland.org/2016/04/12/maryland-general-assembly-ends-session-with-criminal-justice-reform-but-no-tax-cuts/)
that increases funding for rehabilitation programs while reducing overly
punitive policies such as mandatory minimum sentencing. Another bill
championed by the Maryland Coalition for Justice and Police
Accountability brought [*significant changes to
policing*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/maryland_could_lead_the_nation_on_police_reform)
in the state. We came together with activists, victims of police
violence, and even law enforcement personnel to demand common sense
changes that put people first and eliminate special rights for officers.
Among the changes are provisions making it easier for victims and
witnesses of abuse to file complaints, including anonymously, creates an
independent training and standards commission that will modernize
recruitment and set best practices with an emphasis on community
policing, increases transparency into department operations, and
requires departments to track the number of officer-involved incidents
and take preventive action,” Vest recounted.

Despite some qualified victories, Vest concluded, “this session also
serves as a reminder that politics – at least for those playing the game
– isn’t necessarily about doing what’s right for those in need.”

Other bills with red flags for injustice or special interest entered the
lists this year, and some made it through.

A bill that would have given corporations and wealthy individuals tax
breaks for providing [*scholarship money for private
schools*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/school_improvement_or_tax_dollars_for_religious_indoctrination_in_private_schools)
finally failed, probably due to embarrassment, but the Assembly for the
first time set aside money directly for private schools, a priority of
the right getting a foot in the door against public education.

Hogan’s budget, unlike last year’s, fully funded education aid to the
school districts around the state – apparently he learned his lesson
after a significant furor last year, when the outraged legislators
passed a bill (probably of dubious legal standing) that would force him
to provide full funding this year. His budget originally shorted
Baltimore – still restive from the Freddie Gray upheaval – but a
supplemental provided the city some relief in reconstruction from the
effects of the uprising, as well as in other areas. The city still will
not forgive his de facto cancellation of a rail project, the Red Line,
seen as crucial to righting the city’s geographical inequality.

Baltimore, heavily dependent on higher education as an economic engine,
also stands to [*potentially
lose*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/merger_of_umd_campuses_needs_longer_look)
as a result of the merger of two university campuses – the College Park
flagship home of the University of Maryland and the university’s
system’s Baltimore campus. The legislature jumped to pass the merger
bill despite suggestions that a longer look would be prudent.

The carnage reminds us of the Assembly truism that it takes three or
more years to get a good bill through the legislature but only one year
to get a bad bill through. Bills to reform campaign finance routinely
fail each year, never coming to the governor’s desk, and it’s no
accident that the legislators’ near-invulnerability to challenge at the
ballot box is rooted in their creation of “slates” to pool campaign
funds and fend off those challenges. Efforts to rally the legislature
against the Citizens United decision and “corporate personhood” also
foundered despite [*apparent lip service from the
leadership*](http://www.getmoneyoutmd.org/).

You wonder if part of the reason Larry Hogan is so confoundingly popular
among Marylanders (two out of three register Democratic) is that he has
gotten in some respects a free pass. The Assembly is so careful not to
lose on a veto override episode (needing a supermajority) that they
don’t send legislation his way that they might not be able to uphold, if
vetoed. [*Like paid sick
leave*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bal-sick-leave-bill-likely-to-die-in-the-senate-20160407-story.html)
or the EITC bill. Like [*automatic voter registration at age
18*](http://marylandreporter.com/2016/04/07/senate-rejects-automatic-voter-registration/).
[*The Center Maryland blogger Josh
Kurtz*](http://www.centermaryland.org/index.php?option=com_easyblog&view=entry&id=1536&Itemid=286)
observes that Hogan is “a governor who is fluent in social media,
skilled at masking his conservative priorities in bromides, and
relentless in driving his messaging.”

The leadership apparently doesn’t want to give the impression of
weakness that might be signaled by a failure to override. So they don’t
risk the confrontation. It’s likely, too, that there are Democratic
delegates or senators in risky districts who need to avoid voting on
some of these bills. Well, next year is even closer to 2018 and they
will have less time to tuck such votes into the memory hole. Meanwhile,
good bills get the back of the hand for another year. Will next year be
easier?

The leadership’s power trip keeps these highly valuable bills, and the
issues and failures of public will that they involve, basically out of
the discourse at all. Because they don’t want to lose. There are worse
things, one would think, than “losing” to a governor whose right-wing
allegiances are being hidden from the public – with the help of the
Assembly leadership. How are people in general going to see what the
genial Larry Hogan is fronting for – the pro-business, anti-worker
forces that maintain affluent Maryland’s many inequalities in everyday
life – if the Democrats in the Assembly dodge that confrontation
whenever it looks as though they might lose?

If Hogan showed his true colors by vetoing good bills like paid sick
leave, police reform, and the many other good bills we have mentioned,
people might begin to see through the good-guy façade to his being
joined at the hip with the business community and the wealthy. Surely
the Democrats – who are all too cozy with those same forces as well –
could use to sharpen the contrast.

*Woody Woodruff, a production editor for the *Washington Socialist*,
also moderates the blog for* [**Progressive
Maryland**](http://www.progressivemaryland.org)*, from which some of
this material is shamelessly repurposed*. Submissions received at
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com)

[*The Small Joys of Getting Out the Vote for
Bernie*](http://dsadc.org/the-small-joys-of-getting-out-the-vote-for-bernie/)

Saturday, April 30th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2016**

***By Andy Feeney***

I was standing on the corner where Maryland Highway 28 crosses Maryland
182 and waiting for a ride when the first crows turned up.  I had spent
six hours on foot trying to contact possible Bernie voters in a nearby
Aspen Hill neighborhood characterized by  biggish houses, large and
widely separated building lots, very long driveways and a bewildering
labyrinth of winding side streets and small cul de sacs, and I had had
enough walking for the day. It had been a beautiful area to canvass,
admittedly, with tall and stately trees and flowering azaleas and
dogwoods and on one hilly street two deer gazed at me calmly from
someone’s front yard as I trudged past looking for an address.  But now
I wanted to go home.

For more than half an hour I had been standing on the highway divider
along Maryland 182, Layhill Road, wearing my bright red “DSA for Bernie”
shirt in hopes my ride from the office would see me easily.  There’s not
that much to do or see at the intersection of 28 and 182, although the
countryside is pretty enough, and I was growing a little bored when the
crows caught my attention.

First there were three or four of them, up ahead and to my right, and
they were circling slowly in an updraft, high above an open field, as
though looking for something edible.  Then in a few minutes they were
joined by several other crows, so that there were now six or eight of
the birds crossing over Norbeck Road, Maryland 28, toward the big golf
course to south and east of the intersection.  Then still other crows
joined them, so that nine birds were now gliding high in the air above
the golf course.  Then they crossed to the west over Layhill Road and
were circling directly in back of me.

In curiosity, I turned to watch, thinking, “I wonder if they’ve spotted
something dead to eat. “  And then, for a second, I wondered if possibly
they might be waiting to peck at me.  I hadn’t moved much in half an
hour, and as I stood on the median strip I might have looked from the
air like roadkill.  I also was wearing a green khaki cap of a kind often
sported by hunters and fishermen, which may have reminded this
convocation of crows — highly social animals, with long memories that
researchers have documented — of some nasty human who once killed one of
their friends.  Crows apparently don’t forget these things.

Taking off my fisherman’s cap, therefore, and trying not to think of
Hitchcock’s horror movie *The Birds,* I waved in air in the crows’
direction, then walked a few steps down the median strip and back.  In a
minute or two, all the crows silently drifted back across Layhill and
disappeared behind some trees.   I felt a little odd about this.

My bright red Bernie shirt attracted more than the crows that afternoon,
though.  As I stood there on the median strip, an affluent-looking older
white man driving a Lexus and sporting a bushy mustache that made him
resemble the rich banker pictured on the Monopoly cards pulled up beside
me and rolled down his window.  “I’m for Bernie,” he said proudly. “I’ve
contributed to his campaign – twice.”  He smiled and held up two
fingers. “Even though” – his voiced dropped meaningfully and trailed
off.

“Yeah, in Maryland he’s facing an uphill battle,” I said.  “But
supporting him means you’re sending *them* a message.”  The guy with the
mustache nodded, rolled up his window, and made the light.

A few minutes later I heard a beep behind me and a white man in his 40s
driving a pickup truck, a man whose cargo and paint job suggested he was
a landscaper, leaned out his window and yelled “Feel the Bern!”  He gave
me a big grin and a thumbs up sign, which I returned.  “Right on!” I
yelled, and he too disappeared.

A bit later still – my ride was having difficulty getting away from the
local canvass office – a white woman in her early forties, who was
acting almost furtively, as if she were doing something naughty, rolled
down her car window and declared from a lane over in the intersection,
“I’m voting for Bernie in the Tuesday primary!”  Then she rolled off,
looking quite pleased with herself but a little guilty about
transgressing some personal psychological boundary.

For me, it’s the pleasure of small moments like these that have made
canvassing for Bernie this season a lot more enjoyable than I expected
it to be when I signed up for it.  We all know — from DSA Activist
emails, from endless appeals by Maria Svart, and from high school civics
classes, too — that as Americans in a supposedly democratic society, we
“should” do the nuts and bolts work of engaging in local political
activism.  As socialists and/or progressives, we know we “should” sign
up to leaflet outside the polls on election day, hand out literature to
potential voters, take part in worthy petition drives, reach out to
minority and low-income communities, join union picket lines, host
progressive house parties and so forth.

As leftists, a militant minority of us probably share the view of the
English poet William Wordsworth, who in a famous ode described “Duty” as
“Stern Daughter of the Voice of God.”  Others on the wider left may
agree with Nietzsche about local activism representing the “will to
power” in action, whether for good or ill. But what’s often forgotten,
as we uneasily ponder the immense personal sacrifices that committed
socialists must supposedly make for the class struggle, is that some
grassroots political work — including getting out the vote – can be fun.

I don’t want to be guilty of stupid exaggeration about how much fun I
had getting out the Bernie vote in Aspen Hills on April 23.  It’s a
relatively high-income area, and I saw several yard signs for
conservative Democratic candidates in the big front yards, and there
some moments in the day that I found discouraging. I talked to one
allegedly Democratic voter with a giant American flag in his yard and a
hatred of the Environmental Protection Agency, for example, who thinks
Hillary is a crook, Bernie is crazy and Trump makes a lot of sense.  He
indicated that he hates Obama, too, and while he did allow me to sit on
his front porch and rest my feet after several hours walking, his ideas
of what a “sensible” Democratic Party should be nearly made me despair.

But I really did enjoy seeing the deer and talking to the pro-Bernie
drivers at the intersection, and in retrospect I appreciate my odd
experience with the crows, now that it has ended well.  And there were
other, more substantial pleasures to be had from Aspen Hills canvassing
as well.  One favorite moment was when I knocked at a door shortly after
talking to the conservative Democrat with the flag and the attitude and
it was answered by a middle-aged man who said, “My wife, my son and I
all will be voting for Bernie on Tuesday.  Thanks for the work you’re
doing.”

Another good moment was when a woman in her fifties answered the door
and said her husband I was hoping to talk to wasn’t home and that she
couldn’t support Bernie in the primary, because she was a registered
Republican.  She couldn’t say if he was a registered Democrat or not. 
But she thanked me for the Bernie door hanger and hoped I could stay
dry, and it was raining at that time in the morning.  “Speaking of
staying dry, could I use your bathroom?”  I asked.  Sure, she replied,
but please give her a moment so she could be sure it was clean.  As I
was leaving the house a few minutes later, she said one good thing
Bernie had done was improve the quality of debate on the Democratic
side.

“I won’t say anything about the quality of the Republican debate,” she
added a bit tartly.  We commiserated for a few minutes over the prospect
of a Trump or a Cruz presidency, and after we each wished the other well
I walked on.

At another Aspen Hills house, in mid-afternoon, the door was answered by
a short, stocky man in his forties whose biceps looked as swollen as a
weightlifter’s.  He had blue tattoos along his arms and shoulders
beneath an Under Armor tank top.  “You must be here for Ricky,” he
grinned as he eyed my Bernie shirt.  “You’re definitely not here for
me.”

“Yeah, I am here for Ricky,” I said.  He yelled for his son to come to
the door and the son and I had an enthusiastic conversation about
Bernie, so enthusiastic I marked him down as a possible Bernie
volunteer.  “Do you have a phone number where we can reach you?”  I
asked the son.  He said he might as well give me the landline number for
the house.

“If I answer the phone, I’ll probably tell you he isn’t home,” his
father joked.  The three of us smiled at each other and I congratulated
them for having a family where they could tolerate political
differences, and we actually exchanged a few words about runaway
technology under capitalism before I left.

At another Aspen Hills house there was the rich odor of exotic cooking
inside when I knocked on the door at noon.  A very nice Ethiopian
immigrant woman in her twenties who answered said she was definitely
committed to Hillary, but she said it with a smile; we both agreed that
Trump needed to be kept out of the Oval Office.

At another house there was an electric car parked in the garage sporting
a bumper stick that said, “This is what the end of gasoline looks
like.”  The man inside and his wife both seemed to be Hillary
supporters, but it was their teenaged son who was on my list, and all
three listened with interest to my spiel for Bernie.  Eventually the
son, a high school senior taking an honors AP course in history, said he
really didn’t have enough information to cast an informed vote yet and
needed to do some serious online research in the few days remaining
before the primary to make his choice.  It was exactly what I would have
wanted a son of mine to say under the circumstances, although I was sad
to lose a possible vote for Bernie.  I congratulated him and his parents
for being honest and intellectually serious before taking my leave.

I’m only one of several local DSA members I know personally who have
done serious canvassing and get out the vote work for the Sanders
campaign over the past half year.  I can’t speak for the experience of
the others, who’ve include most the old guard activists on the Steering
Committee as well as four highly dedicated younger members and David
Duhalde, who now works for the national office.  Several of the younger
members have genuinely worked as organizers for DSA’s Bernie work,
scheduling regular canvassing events in the District, organizing a march
for Bernie attended by local college students, assisting in the
organizing of debate watch parties and the like.  But I’ve confined my
work to individual volunteering, mostly in the form of leafleting and
door-to-door GOTV efforts.  For me, human interactions like those I’ve
outlined above make leafleting and GOTV work especially rewarding.

The weekend before three of us in the Metro DC chapter joined the
National Nurses Union in getting out the vote for Bernie in Montgomery
County, which is the event that involved me with door-to-door canvassing
in Aspen Hill, our local co-chair Carolyn Byerly organized at least half
a dozen DSA members in handing out DSA literature for the Bern in the
Maryland suburbs.  On that weekend I and a new DSA supporter distributed
flyers and fact sheets for Bernie near the Silver Spring metro station,
and it was a very different ambiance from that I discovered in Aspen
Hills.

In Silver Spring it was mostly a matter of handing literature to people
on the street, or in a few cases to local street vendors.  There wasn’t
nearly as much walking and the work went faster, partly because a big
fraction of those we encountered were already enthusiastic about
Bernie.  That was gratifying.  However, my favorite moment of the day
came when I approached a small group of black and Hispanic teenaged guys
hanging out at Veterans Plaza near the Silver Spring Civic Center.  When
I handed them some DSA flyers on Bernie, including national DSA’s new
fact sheet on Bernie’s record on racial justice issues, they were
enthusiastic.

“Hey, man, could I have some of these to hand out?” one of them asked. 
“I think I could use them to meet some girls.”  Another of the group
asked to help me and the other DSA volunteer in distributing our other
flyers to people at the Plaza, and did very well at it.  Closer to the
Civic Center, where early voting for the primary was occurring that day,
I talked to a campaign worker for a local progressive Democratic
candidate for Congress who was extremely interested in DSA’s history,
current membership and structure, and said she might be very interested
in attending local DSA meetings once her work for the candidate is
concluded for the year.  Also staffing a table outside the Civic Center
that Saturday was the head of the Montgomery County Democratic Party,
who said he was delighted to see us working for Bernie, since Bernie’s
candidacy has sparked such involvement by younger voters in Democratic
politics.

I got a different kind of enjoyment still from doing individual
volunteering for the official Bernie campaign in Virginia in the last
few days leading up to the Virginia primary.  The two high points of my
GOTV volunteering in Arlington were probably some extremely polite and
civil exchanges I had with Trump supporters in one middle-class
neighborhood, on the one hand, and on the other hand walking into a
popular Italian restaurant nearby and having the cashier and the guys
behind the sandwich counter both make favorable remarks about Bernie’s
candidacy and my tee shirt advertising it.

The next two days, while doing individual volunteering for the GOTV
effort in Alexandria, I found myself visiting lower-income apartment
complexes a few miles from King Street.  When I knocked at the door of
one second-floor apartment, the old woman who answered spoke more
Chinese than English and was having a hard time remembering things,
including the new phone number of her son, who was the Democratic voter
I was supposed to canvass.  Nevertheless she invited me in and had me
sit on her sofa while she rummaged in her effects for her phonebook, and
when she finally called him he assured her, and me, that he was a strong
Bernie fan and would be voting in the primary.

In another apartment complex in the same neighborhood, a young Latino
man was repairing a motorcycle on the landing outside of his mother’s
apartment and waved me through an open door when I asked to speak to
her.  His mother, too, seemed to speak very little English, but her
daughter translated for her and after a somewhat lengthy conversation
she decided that yes, she would vote for Bernie in the primary, as all
the other candidates running were only representing the rich.  At still
another address in Alexandria the young white man who was on my list to
canvass said of course he was for Bernie, but he actually believed in a
more radical socialist vision.  We then had a longish exchange about
Marxism, capitalism and socialism before I’d gotten enough of a break
from constant walking to want to move on.

I’ve read a good deal of radical literature over the course of my life,
although never in a disciplined way, yet there is something about
encountering real people through political work for Bernie this election
season that I find enormously exciting.  Somehow, it represents a step
far beyond what I’ve picked up in the way of pure socialist theory. 
There’s a buzz to be had, a high you can experience from talking to
people in this way, and I can easily see why some activists find it
addictive.  I’m hoping it makes me a better socialist over time.   For
now, though, I’m sure it’s making me a happier one.

[*The Team that Dare Not Speak Its
Name*](http://dsadc.org/the-team-that-dare-not-speak-its-name/)

Saturday, April 30th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2016**

*By Bill Mosley*

Review of *Redskins:  Insult and Brand*.  By C. Richard King. 
University of Nebraska Press, 2016.  256 pp.

When the Cleveland Indians last month announced that they would
[*miminize the use of their Chief Wahoo
logo*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/early-lead/wp/2016/04/03/cleveland-indians-have-officially-demoted-the-chief-wahoo-logo/)
– the idiotically grinning Native American stereotype that disgraced the
players’ caps and sleeves – the campaign to eliminate Native names,
logos and imagery from sports took a baby step forward – sort of.  The
Indians removed the Wahoo image from caps, replacing it with a block C,
but the face still smirks from the players’ sleeves, and the team will
continue to sell Wahoo paraphernalia.  By trying to be only a little bit
racist, the club satisfied no one.  But the move did show that the
growing movement to eliminate Native stereotyping in sports is being
heard, if not always heeded.

The fact that the Cleveland club was doing a little something put the
spotlight back on the sports team engaging in the most egregious and
offensive appropriation of Native symbols and verbiage – Washington,
D.C.’s professional football team, whose name is the slur in the title
of C. Richard King’s timely and valuable new book.  King examines the
battle over the club’s name and the campaign to eliminate names and
imagery insulting to Natives from sports in general.  While the
dictionary-defined slur that is at the heart of the controversy appears
in the books title, in the text itself King substitutes an asterisk for
the “e” in most uses so as not to repeat the insult.

King, a professor of comparative ethnic studies at Washington State
University, makes clear from the beginning which side he is on. 
“*Redskin* is a problem,” he writes.  “It is an outdated reference to an
American Indian.  It is best regarded as a racial slur on par with other
denigrating terms.”

King examines the Washington team’s name, and Native names and imagery
in sports in general, through a lens of the white privilege that has
made it acceptable to degrade and stereotype minorities for fun and
profit – that is, until the minorities fight back.  While African
Americans and Latinos have had a large measure of success at removing
demeaning stereotypes of themselves from popular culture and advertising
(gone are “Sambo’s” and the “Frito Bandito”), Native Americans, due to
their smaller population and isolation, have had a tougher battle.  But,
as King amply notes, they are making progress.

King explores the history of the Washington team’s name, and finds the
official backstory fails to hold water.  Owner Daniel Snyder claims that
the team, formerly located in Boston and nicknamed the Braves, was
renamed in 1932 by its new coach William “Lone Star” Dietz who was said
to be of Lakota heritage.  Therefore, said Snyder, the name “was, and
continues to be, a badge of honor.”  But King explodes that myth,
finding that Dietz was in fact of German heritage and claimed Native
ancestry likely due to the early 20^th^ century “nationalist zeal for
authentic Indianness and the popularity of playing Indian.”  Dietz, in
fact, tried to evade the draft during World War I by calling himself a
“non-citizen Indian,” a claim that was deemed fraudulent by the FBI and
led to his spending a month in jail.

The real story behind the name seems more straightforward.  The change
in the team’s nickname coincided with its move from Braves Field to
Fenway Park, and seems to have been largely what we today would call a
“branding” decision, both to call attention to the new venue and
distinguish the team from the baseball franchise also called the Boston
Braves.  The new name, which traveled to Washington with the team’s
relocation in 1937, was similar to the old one but just different
enough, and owner George Preston Marshall had no compunction against
adopting a name that stereotyped and demeaned Natives.  Marshall’s team,
King notes, was the last in the NFL to sign African American players,
and not until 1962 when it was pressured to do so by the federal
government.

The origin of the word “Redskin” itself is even murkier, with various
sources linking it to war paint once used by some tribes, and others to
the bloody scalps of Natives collected when colonial governments put a
price on their heads.  But there is no question that as Western
settlement advanced and Natives were driven from their land, the word
increasingly became recognized as a slur.

The popularity of Native team names, logos and imagery, King effectively
shows, is bound up in white America’s contradictory and changing views
of the country’s original inhabitants.  While in the 19^th^ century
Natives were often viewed as little better than pests that, along with
the bison, needed to be exterminated or at least removed to where whites
would not have to encounter them, by the 20^th^ century – when most
remaining natives lived on remote reservations – it became safe to view
them through the lens of nostalgia.  “It was,” King writes, “a
paradoxical love of imagined Indians and a loathing of actual, embodied
Indians that continues to this day.”  Native names and imagery made a
transition from denoting savagery to hearkening back to a time of
simplicity and bravery, to the “noble warrior.”  The traditions of
disparate nations – feathered headdresses, tomahawks, teepees, totem
poles – were lumped together to create a single, generic “Indian,” more
a fictional character and a childhood game than a real, breathing human
being.  And, of course, a sports mascot.

One of King’s more valuable insights is how Native team names and
mascots stem from the white man’s desire to dominate and appropriate
Native culture.  “Native Americans,” King writes, “are not unlike
trophies, remnants from a kill, longingly kept reminders of past glory,
and continuing signs of the prowess and superiority through which
Euro-Americans channel the strength and energy of those they . . .have
vanquished.”

For decades, Native Americans – and their non-native allies – have
fought back against the hurtful stereotyping of their images and
traditions.  As early as 1972, Native advocates pressured the Washington
team on its derogatory nickname.  More recently, lawsuits have
challenged the team’s ability to trademark merchandise bearing a
“disparaging name;” the U.S. Trademark and Patent Office ruled against
the team, which is appealing the decision.  Native organizations such as
Change the Mascot and Not Your Mascots have kept up the heat on the
Washington team while convincing many college and high school teams to
change their names; while most of these teams did not have a nickname as
offensive as the Washington club, their uses of Native symbols and
stereotypes remained offensive and insulting.  A November 2014
demonstration in Minneapolis, where Washington was playing the Vikings,
took the demand for a name change directly to the team.  Non-natives
also are joining the cause of changing the Washington team’s name; many
prominent sports journalists, including ESPN’s Mike Wise and NBC’s Bob
Costas, have been outspoken on the issue.  And in Washington, a
grassroots organization, [*Rebrand Washington Football
(RWF*](http://www.rebrandwf.org/)), has been conducting a petition and
informational campaign to change the name; King includes quotes from RWF
co-founders Ian Washburn and Josh Silver in his book.  (Full
disclosure:  the writer of this article is a member of RWF).

The book marshals a wealth of evidence showing why the Washington team’s
name in particular, and most Native names and mascots generally, should
be changed.  Unfortunately, King too often resorts to academic jargon to
get his point across, and the book can be dense at times.  King also
could have benefitted from tighter editing:  He repeats information and
ideas throughout the book, such as the team’s origin in Boston, the
heritage of “Lone Star” Dietz, and the team’s use of the offensive
“Little Indian” image.  He also restates the notion of real vs. imagined
Indians in a number of different places and different ways.

King offers only hints to two questions on readers’ minds:  Why does
Snyder cling so tenaciously to the name in the face of protests and
criticism, and what will it take to bring about change?  King cites
Snyder’s childhood as a fan of the team and his fondness for everything
connected to it, but the real answer is more likely the man’s
stubbornness and willful refusal to be told by outsiders what to do. 
Now that he has dug himself in on the name, dislodging him will be
doubly difficult.  Nevertheless, King suggests a number of possible
wedges that might separate him from the name, such as his desire for a
new stadium in DC coupled with the District government’s stated
unwillingness to let him bring the name with him.  An unfavorable final
outcome to the trademark case could be an impetus, as well as growing
recognition among fans that the team’s name and symbols are stigmatized
by racism.  If nothing else, someday Snyder will no longer own the team
and the new owner or owners will be able to look at the issue with fresh
eyes.  But advocates hope it won’t take that long, and continued
pressure and public education are the sometimes slow but necessary steps
toward forcing the team to change.  King’s book provides valuable
ammunition that might help bring about that change sooner rather than
later.

[*This Pie is Not in the Sky: How Idealism Moves
Reality*](http://dsadc.org/this-pie-is-not-in-the-sky-how-idealism-moves-reality/)

Saturday, April 30th, 2016

**Progressives don’t know their cultural history, while the Right Wing
has capitalized the power of idealism **

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* May 2016**

*By Jessie Mannisto*

We’re hearing the phrase “pie in the sky” tossed around a lot these
days. Center-left readers of respectable news sources—the type that have
compared Bernie’s proposed policies to
[*unicorns*](http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2016/02/16/my-unicorn-problem/)
and [*puppies with lottery tickets tied to their
tails*](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/16/us/politics/left-leaning-economists-question-cost-of-bernie-sanderss-plans.html)—often
note that as tasty as that pie sounds, there is an election coming up
and they’re on a diet.

It’s ironic to compare a socialist crusader’s proposals to some sort of
celestial pastry, as it was the radical labor leader and songwriter
[*Joe Hill*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joe_Hill), a
[*Wobbly*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industrial_Workers_of_the_World),
who [*coined*](http://www.phrases.org.uk/meanings/pie-in-the-sky.html)
the phrase “pie in the sky.” Hill (who later became a martyr when he was
executed for a crime of which he was likely innocent, but I digress)
wrote a song called “[*The Preacher and the
Slave*](http://www.folkarchive.de/pie.html)” to the tune of a hymn
associated with the Salvation Army, “In the Sweet Bye and Bye.” [*Utah
Phillips*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utah_Phillips) will [*sing it
for you*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJ236CwhlPw):

Or if you’d prefer to stick with text, here’s the first verse and
chorus:

*Long-haired preachers come out every night,\
Try to tell you what’s wrong and what’s right;\
But when asked how ’bout something to eat\
They will answer with voices so sweet:*

CHORUS:\
*You will eat, bye and bye,\
In that glorious land above the sky (Way up high!)\
Work and pray, live on hay,\
You’ll get pie in the sky when you die. (That’s a lie!)*

When Hill sang of pie in the sky, he was attacking what he believed was
an imaginary reward intended to tranquilize the otherwise volatile
masses. The Salvation Army’s decision to worry more about souls than
about hunger here on Earth infuriated him. “Pie in the sky” is an insult
directed at that sort of nebulous promise that one day things will
finally be great if you just fall in line and believe what the powerful
are telling you.

That’s definitely *not* a criticism that fits Bernie Sanders.

Most other wealthy nations have baked the very pies Bernie’s proposing.
Things like universal health care, paid sick leave, and publicly funded
college can and do work. The task now at hand is convincing
policymakers, current and future, that we can smell the pie and would
very much like a slice.

*And there’s the rub! * say too many who otherwise support these
policies.  *We could never convince our leaders that they should support
such radical plans! * If you don’t actually support these progressive
goals yourself, that’s one thing; I’m not talking to you here, and I
don’t consider liberal opinion disseminators like Nicholas Kristof and
his ilk progressive allies after articles like the one [*I
criticized*](https://counternarration.wordpress.com/2016/02/07/nyts-kristof-spreads-wall-street-austerians-fud/)
last month.  (Perhaps these folks have themselves used these goals as
their own sky pie to herd the masses along and are now alarmed that
we’re actually serious about them.  I dunno, I don’t hang out in their
circles.)  But many people who I know actually support these policies
nevertheless are convinced we live in a country of ever-ascendant
right-wingers and see no room or reason even to try.

This is not only wrong (see, for instance [*a February poll by
Vox*](http://www.vox.com/2016/2/3/10904988/bernie-sanders-political-revolution-poll)
suggesting broad support for Bernie’s proposals); it’s also dangerous
defeatism. And parsing the success of those very right wingers who scare
us so much shows us why.

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="1.5in" height="3.125in"}

**The “Overton Window”**

A central concept underlying the growth of the plutocratic deregulating
antidemocratic movement is the [*Overton
Window*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overton_window). This bit of
political theory comes from the [*Mackinac Center for Public
Policy*](http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Mackinac_Center_for_Public_Policy),
which SourceWatch describes as a right-wing pressure group established
by activists seeking to promote free market, pro-business policies. 
What they called the Overton Window, after one of the think tank’s vice
presidents, refers to the small section of the overall range of all
conceivable policies, from one extreme to the other, that are deemed
acceptable by mainstream voters and that, therefore, a politician can
support and still survive the next election. The image shown here above
gives you an example of what this means.  If you shift the position or
size of the window, represented in teal in the graphic, you change what
is politically possible.

This is what the Right has been doing over the past few decades.  With
funding from the Koch Brothers and Michigan plutocrats, the Mackinac
Center has normalized and pushed ideas that would have been seen as
crazy not so long ago.

And look at what the Right’s version of idealism has achieved.  Not so
long ago, the goal of making Michigan—*Michigan! * We named a freeway
after [*Walter
Reuther*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walter_Reuther)!—a
Right-to-Work-For-Less state would have been considered among the most
egregious of celestial pastries.  The Emergency Manager law that brought
us the suspension of democracy that led to the poisoning of Flint
represent another realization of the Right’s wildest dreams. I’m sure
you can think of plenty of other noxious right-wing pies, but I’ll stop
before I depress everyone. The point is, Republicans haven’t sat there
and said, gee, we’d like to do this, but people aren’t on our side. 
They went out there and shifted the window of discourse.

I’d wager that the Right’s willingness to champion their goals has even
helped mobilize their voters, giving them a reason to get excited and
come out to vote in midterm elections.  The Democratic Party, meanwhile,
has hunkered down and trembled under the banner of “no, we can’t,”
trying to position itself as a defender of a status quo in which many
voters, including plenty of moderates, see cracks.

Bernie Sanders’s campaign has already been a tremendous success, because
he’s opened the Overton Window on the left.  Progressive economic goals
are now back inside of it.  But this won’t go any further without a
fight, and I’m not talking about the one with the Right.  I’m talking
about the alumni of the [*Democratic Leadership
Council*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Democratic_Leadership_Council)
and their elite allies — the ones who closed the left side of the
Overton Window in the 1990s — who are telling us that economically
progressive goals are forever out of reach.  No, we can’t.

** **![](media/image2.jpeg){width="2.0729166666666665in"
height="3.125in"}**  Radical labor leader Joe Hill, who coined the
phrase “pie in the sky”**

More than anyone in national politics today, Bernie stands for the same
ordinary working Americans for whom Joe Hill wrote his songs. Bernie
understands that there needs to be a real fight to make the system work
for all of us. Our detractors who fancy themselves pragmatists tell us
that, y’know, Bernie’s not going to be able to implement all these
changes.  (I wonder if they think a Republican Congress is going to go
along with Hillary Clinton, but I digress.)

We know that.  But we also know that each vote for Bernie opens the
Overton Window a little further. If you are for social safety nets, if
you want to push for an economy whose benefits are accessible to all, if
you think banks that are too big to fail are too big to exist, if you’re
impatient waiting for cautious politicians to recognize the rights of
oppressed minorities, if you are embarrassed that our country is the
only major industrialized country that doesn’t mandate paid family leave
or sick time, et cetera, then voting for Bernie is at present is one
great way to show that.

It can’t be the only way.  We need a movement, much like the one
described recently in [*an excellent
article*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/miles-mogulescu/time-to-transform-bernies_b_9547060.html)
in the Huffington Post.  And hey, if you’re a progressive for Hillary,
we still would love to welcome you on board; I know you have your
reasons to support her in 2016, and that’s cool.  Just don’t believe
anyone who tries to tell you what can and cannot be.  And if they bring
up celestial pastry, perhaps they’d be interested in the story of a
Wobbly named Joe Hill.

*This* pie is real.  It can be done, no matter what the comfortable
elites at *The New York Times* want you to believe. They’re the ones who
are really promising pie in the sky, in the original sense of the term.

Sing with me now!

*Pay your loans, bye and bye,*\
*With that glorious job in the sky. (Way up high!)*\
*Work and pay, live on hay,*\
*You’ll get health care in the sky when you die. (That’s a lie!)*

*Jessie Mannisto blogs at:*
[*counternarration.wordpress.com*](https://counternarration.wordpress.com/)
– *where this article first appeared*.

[*US Labor Against War Keys March Socialist Salon
Discussion*](http://dsadc.org/us-labor-against-war-keys-march-socialist-salon-discussion/)

Saturday, April 30th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2016**

*By Kurt Stand*

**Background**

There was a time, in the not too distant past, when wars – in all their
horror and misery – had beginnings and endings, when official rhetoric
would proclaim that the particular war being fought would be the last
war.  There was even a brief period – between the US withdrawal from
Vietnam in 1973 and our invasion of Grenada in 1983 – when the
military’s hand was stayed in circumstances which would now elicit
drones or ground troops or mercenaries.  Such days are long gone, our
country now engaged in what amounts to endless war, bringing death and
destruction around the world without even a pretense that these will
ever cease.  The change didn’t just happen, the militarization of our
economy and culture are part and parcel of the corporate neo-liberal
assault on democracy and workers rights.

There was also a time, in the not too distant past, when the dominant
leadership of US unions cheered wars as a source of jobs, as a way to
“prove” a patriotism often called into question by business interests. 
And such support had adherents amongst rank-and-file unionists at a time
when US capitalism appeared to offer opportunities not known elsewhere. 
Although there was always more working-class and union opposition to war
than official mythology would have us believe, it is also undeniable
that those resisting the siren call of the battlefield have generally
been a minority – especially before the body bags start piling up.  Yet
this is no longer the case, the AFL-CIO in its majority has spoken out
against war, and in so doing has expressed sentiments of rank-and-file
members.  This too, didn’t just happen, it came about as a result of
conscious work by union activists who sought to democratize the labor
movement and widen its vision to better combat the destructiveness of
unbridled corporate power at home and around the world.

Although not a central part of either campaign, Clinton’s hawkishness
has made clear that her support for the invasion of Iraq was no
accident, has made clear her readiness to continue to assert US military
power abroad no matter the cost in human life or social well-being.
 Sanders, by contrast, in his opposition to the Iraq war, his
willingness to speak of Palestinians as human beings who have suffered
injustices, his inclusion of climate change and corporate free trade
pacts as foreign policy issues, has sharpened the distinctions between
the two of them.  The political revolution Sanders has spoken of, is
connected to the question implied above — are we a country of war or a
country of peace?

**Talks**

These themes were in the background of DSA’s March 21 Socialist Salon
which featured two USLAW – US Labor Against War – co-conveners: Brooks
Sunkett, Senior Vice President for Public Workers, Health and Education
for CWA – and Bob Muhlenkamp, former Executive Vice President and
Director of Organizing for SEIU-1199, and Director of Organizing for the
Teamsters during its brief period under reform leadership.  USLAW is a
union organization, financed by affiliated locals across the country
that recognize the connection between the labor’s domestic issues and
the struggles for peace and justice workers are engaged in around the
world.  USLAW’S National Assembly held in Washington DC the weekend of
March 19-20 provided a forum to analyze the global issues confronting
working people today and a place to strategize on how to forge stronger
connections between social and economic justice initiatives with the
peace movement.

Sunkett began the Salon reminding participants that working people are
the first to suffer in war, recalling his own experience as a soldier in
Vietnam while still a teenager.  That experience – what he and his
fellow GIs endured, the suffering they witnessed being inflicted on the
Vietnamese people – scarred him but also gave him an understanding of
the world which he subsequently brought to his work as a union activist
and leader.  He explained that what he observed and felt during that war
was in his mind when he introduced a resolution developed by USLAW at
the 2005 AFL-CIO Convention condemning the US war against Iraq.  The
resolution – passed without opposition – marked the first time a US
labor federation condemned an on-going war.  The broad backing for the
resolution was built upon the heritage of unionists who opposed the war
in Vietnam, then, a decade later, opposed US intervention in Central
America and US support for South African apartheid.  USLAW was able to
come to the Convention having already garnered support from state and
municipal labor federations, as well as from union locals and regional
organizations for the resolution Sunkett introduced.  It was the prior
work of organizing that created the basis for this historic anti-war
measure.

But not that alone.  Sunkett noted that USLAW also organized tours of US
unionists to Iraq and of Iraqi unionists to the US – tours which brought
out the common interests of working people in both countries, making
solidarity more concrete by giving it a human face.   Mutual opposition
to the war machine was also due to the shared public consequence for war
not only brings death and destruction, it also distorts the economy by
taking investments out of socially useful production and undermines
social spending because massive arms expenditures takes money away from
public needs.  This led Sunkett to speak of an initiative CWA developed
and outlined in a brochure: *Building a Movement for Economic Justice
and Democracy*.  The Communications Workers of America demonstrates in
those pages the linkage between the growth of inequality in society to
the successful decades-long corporate assault on organized labor.  That
linkage, in turn, provides the basis for an appeal to progressive and
civic organizations from all walks of life and communities to work
together to repair our broken political democracy.  It is a logic
consistent with the platform put forward by Bernie Sanders, and
consistent with that CWA endorsed Sanders for president – an endorsement
was based upon the democratic participation of union members, in a
process Sunkett explained.  Running as a thread in his remarks was the
need to overturn the Supreme Court’s Citizens United decision to equate
corporate money with free speech. This, Sunkett stressed, is not simply
needed to limit the direct power of big money in elections, it is needed
to end the distorting power of the 1% in all phases of our society –
including that of the arms industry and military establishment.

Muhlenkamp took up that theme when describing his work helping organize
the massive 1982 Nuclear Freeze march in New York at the height of war
tensions fueled by Ronald Reagan’s nuclear weapons build-up.  At the
time Muhlenkamp was an officer of 1199, a groundbreaking hospital
workers union that had made an enormous difference in the lives of its
members.  Leon Davis, the founder and then president of the union said,
however, that all the gains working people had made through hard fought
struggle could be wiped out in an instance if work broke out.  It was a
reminder that unionists had to break out of their own silos, their own
narrow focus on only what lies immediately before them, for labor rights
can’t exist without peace.

Bringing this sensibility back to the present, he then recounted his
trip last month to Vietnam and Cambodia, countries that are still living
with the destruction caused by the rain of bombs our government dropped
on them during that long war.  Yet despite the environmental and human
loss, the people of those countries are looking forward toward building
a future, a reminder that we should do so as well.  Yet, Muhlenkamp
added, there is one figure for whom forgiveness should impossible, and
that is Henry Kissinger – the architect of war policies during the Nixon
Administration who unleashed a blood bath Christmas 1972 simply to
demonstrate US power at a time when the US government was already
preparing to withdraw from the conflict.

The significance of that for today is that Hilary Clinton has referred
to Kissinger as a man whom she respects and from whom she has learned. 
And what those lessons amount to can be gleaned from a *New York Times*
article (“How Hillary Clinton Became a
Hawk” [*http://nyti.ms/1WH99LV*](http://nyti.ms/1WH99LV)) that speaks to
her intimate associations with military contractors and arms
manufacturers — wielding the kind of influence she pretends does not
exist with her Wall Street financial backers.  A symmetry between
military power, corporate power and anti-unionism Muhlenkamp noted, was
on full display in Iraq – for the first action taken by the US
occupation authorities after Baghdad was conquered was to ban public
sector unions.  Oil fields and most industry had been nationalized in
Iraq, so this action was effectively a US ban on the country’s unions.

Such connections, in turn, led Muhlenkamp to speak of the importance of
the political alternative the Sanders campaign has opened, an
alternative which, importantly, has allowed socialism to re-enter our
country’s political discourse.  That said, and notwithstanding the clear
difference between Sanders and Clinton on issues of war and peace,
Bernie’s campaign has focused on domestic issues.  Muhlenkamp suggested
that this is a reflection of a change in society which was also
discussed at the just-concluded USLAW assembly.

Young people – the millennials – have grown up in a time of on-going
war, with the consequence that war has become virtually normalized as an
inevitable part of our modern world.  Moreover, the stagnating economy
combined with growing poverty has meant that a career in the military is
one of the few avenues open to young people who want to break free from
the limitations that surround them.  So whereas ROTC – the Reserve
Officers’ Training Corp – was kicked off one college campus after
another in the late 1960s and early 1970s, they have made a huge
comeback not only at universities but even high schools.  USLAW
recognized that this is a reality which the anti-war movement has to
take into account.  So it is passing the reins to a new generation, one
less marked by the Vietnam War, but instead is attuned to today’s
realities.

**Discussion and Reflections**

Realities that have found expression in the Sanders’ campaign, the
support he has received amongst young people itself providing a bridge
from struggles of the past to today while expressing an energy, a
hopefulness and an openness that will be needed if the opportunity now
before us is ceased.  Much of the discussion after the presentations
focused on Sanders, not only his candidacy but those running for Senate
and House seats, those running for local offices.

The Maryland primaries held but a few days later were a reminder of how
much more need be done – for not only did Sanders lose in the state, but
so too did many of those running on an anti-corporate platform akin to
his.  And although there were some bright spots, such as Jamie Raskin’s
victory, there were more defeats, including those of Joseline
Pena-Melnyk and Donna Edwards by establishment Democrat candidates, that
were especially painful.  Edwards loss in particular was a loss that
spoke to systemic opposition to independence, that racial and gender
representation is only allowed to tokens beholden to those above rather
than their constituencies.  All of which were predictable and all of
which touched on questions raised at the Salon – most pointedly that
posed back to participants by Sunkett asking what each would do if
Clinton not Sanders is the eventual nominee of the Democratic Party.

The answers varied from person to person, yet the agreement expressed
lay in the need to continue to organize, to continue to address the
issues behind the broad support for Sanders.  This was on display during
the Awakening Democracy/Rally for Democracy actions the week before,
simultaneous with USLAW’s Assembly.  Alongside direct action civil
disobedience with arrests of over 1,000 there was congressional
lobbying; alongside workshops to encourage civic engagement and
knowledge there was a public rally at the Capital Building.  The twinned
themes of all were the need to end the corrupting role of money in
politics and the need to defend and expand voting rights.  The
expression for the need for such change was the need for environmental
protection, an end to anti-LBGT laws, for immigrant rights, an end to
gun violence, support for peace not war.

And, just as at our Salon, the voice of labor was heard – especially in
the presence of members of the Amalgamated Transit Union embroiled
locally in conflicts with our Metro system; and in the presence of
leaders and members of CWA now in the midst of a 39,000 member strike. 
Sunkett spoke of the strike, the issues workers were facing and called
on everyone to join the picket lines and give financial assistance to
those who walked off the job rather than give in to the concessionary
demands of business.  People at the meeting opened their pockets to
contribute – demonstrating in action that the movements for peace and
for social and economic justice are all different aspects of the same
demand for a genuine democracy – aka — socialism.

W[*e Deserve Better- Say No to Walmart
Expansion*](http://dsadc.org/we-deserve-better-say-no-to-walmart-expansion/)

Saturday, April 30th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2016                     **

*By Kurt Stand*

**Perspective**

Bernie Sanders likely will not get the nomination, nor win the
presidency.  But that doesn’t mean that his campaign was in vain. 
Rather the work done serves as a reminder that organizing to improve
conditions of life in our own communities when joined to a vision of
social solidarity can sustain struggles over the long haul – and can
sometimes even surprise us with a victory.  What follows is a
description of just such efforts undertaken to stop Walmart expansion in
Prince George’s County.

** The Problem**

Good neighbors are trustworthy, good neighbors take care of their own
houses or apartments and lend a hand to those around them when help is
needed.  By any such definition, Walmart has been a bad neighbor to
communities across the country.  One doesn’t have far to go to discover
instances of such; an example can be found in Prince George’s County’s
Duvall Village.  Walmart announced in 2013 its intention to put a
24-hour store in a small community.  Residents, concerned about safety,
environmental damage, and a further hit to property values in an area
that still hasn’t recovered from the 2008 financial crisis, organized
opposition.  Walmart countered with the alleged economic benefits of the
store.  But that myth was countered when neighborhood activists cited
statistics revealing that Walmart destroys three jobs for every two it
creates (by causing layoffs or store closings in existing businesses
unable to compete), and underpays its workforce (half of its employees
earn less than \$25,000 per year).  The weight of such evidence, backed
by public meetings, public hearings and a signature campaign,
contributed to a decision by the Prince George’s County Council –
exercising its land use capacity authority while wearing its District
County hat – to vote unanimously in 2015 to deny Walmart’s application. 
That decision should have ended matters but Walmart lived up to its
reputation of not caring about the opinions of communities; it appealed
the Council’s decision, showing a complete lack of respect for the
residents of Duvall Village.  The Court hearing was held on April 22,
residents waiting to see if the victory they thought they won is
protected or if they will have to resume their organizing.

Meanwhile, a new battle is looming.  Walmart’s treatment of its own
property and the property surrounding its Capital Plaza store over the
past decade has demonstrated the lack of respect to the entire Prince
George’s County community that Duvall Village residents feared.  And
that record of bad behavior is the reason for local opposition to
Walmart’s proposed expansion at the Capital Plaza site it has occupied
for nearly a decade.

Walmart elicits such opposition because it operates on a business model
opposed to any accountability to customers, to employees, to
communities.  Thus it has no compunction to break promises made, as
recently witnessed in DC where Walmart announced it was not opening two
stores in distressed Southeast communities that had been promised as
part of an agreement that allowed the company to open stores in three
more lucrative neighborhoods.  A handshake had sealed the deal – the
District government’s mistake was banking on Walmart’s integrity.  At
the same time, Walmart announced it was closing hundreds of stores
across the country.  Business conditions change, consolidation and
closing of existing outlets, plants, offices, can happen to any
company.  But what makes this especially problematic when Walmart is
involved is the gap between the jobs and development promised when they
go into a community and what they deliver.  Their cost-cutting methods
of operation drive other businesses out of an area—so when they do
shutter their doors they often leave a community worse off than when
they entered.

 

Such an outcome flows from an unsustainable business model that pushes
costs on those it serves.  The low-wage, often part-time jobs Walmart
does provide allow its employees little in the way of benefits or
possible savings.  When a wealthy company acts irresponsibly, taxpayers
must bear the burden – as when people with jobs still need subsidized
health care, rent assistance, food stamps.  After all, one must live
even when not earning a living wage.  Moreover, that low-wage model
undermines the ability of other retailers that want to treat their
employees with more justice from doing so, because they can’t compete
against those low costs.  Walmart’s refusal to pay its fair share
extends beyond its mistreatment of employees to all other areas of
business.  Unlike responsible companies, its pays for neither security
nor groundskeeping – not caring whether these are provided by the local
communities, by volunteers, or not at all; just so long as it doesn’t
come out of their bottom line.

**Forum Talks: Looking Back**

Concerns such as those above lay behind many of the remarks made at
Progressive Cheverly’s February 4 Forum: *The Proposed Super Walmart at
Capital Plaza — is it good for the local community?*  Addressing a full
house of residents concerned about the possibility of having  a “Super
Walmart” as a neighbor were Cheverly Mayor Mike Callahan; Progressive
Maryland Staff Representative Jennifer Dwyer from Duvall Village;
 Madeline Golde and Clareen Heikal, Progressive Cheverly representatives
in the Community Standards Coalition; and Malcolm Augustine, community
leader and Progressive Cheverly member.  They described Walmart’s
failure to adequately address past concerns or keep promises once made,
and explained the reasons that more space for Walmart will not lead to
the economic development area communities want and need.  And they
concluded with suggestions of actions people can take to ensure that
citizen concerns are heard.

Past is prologue was the theme of Heikal and Golde’s remarks as they
described the background to current concerns over Walmart’s plans. 
Prior to the Capital Plaza Walmart being built in 2007, the property in
Landover Hills had been empty for 11 years.  Although there was a great
deal of interest within the community for retail stores opening at the
site, the kind of development Walmart provides did not appear to offer a
solution to the lack of local shopping and lack of jobs.  Progressive
Cheverly helped found the Community Standards Coalition in 2005, with
the initial goal to keep Walmart from coming into the area.  Once their
presence in our area became inevitable, the Coalition established
criteria the company needed to meet in order to become a good corporate
neighbor – criteria which Walmart has, for the most part, fallen short
of.  Since putting in the expansion request, they have made some
improvements; after 8 years of not being responsive to community
concerns these latest actions are likely only being made to weaken
opposition to store expansion.

The Community Standards Coalition – comprised of the Town of
Bladensburg, Town of Cheverly, City of College Park, Town of Colmar
Manor, Town of Edmonston, City of Glenarden, Greater Landover Knolls
Civic Association, City of Hyattsville, Hyattsville Organization for
Positive Environment, Landover Area Revitalization, City of Mount
Rainier, City of New Carrollton, Port Towns Community Development
Corporation, Progressive Cheverly, Radiant Valley Civic Association,
Town of Riverdale Park –  agreed upon nine goals when first formed.  The
nine demands are:

-   Prohibition on sale of guns and ammunition.

-   Prohibition on alcohol sales.

-   Provide parking lot security to protect customers and employees.

-   No 24-hour store; hours should be comparable to other retailers
    in area.

-   Work with community leaders in adjoining neighborhoods to address
    congestion and security issues.

-   Design a building with attractive façade and landscaping.

-   Establish an energy-efficient and environmentally innovative site.

-   Recruit workers from the area and engage in workforce development.

-   Engage in ongoing dialog with elected municipal and civic
    association leaders in the area concerning these issues during the
    duration of the store’s operation.

In addition, the community insisted that Walmart not open up a grocery
store at the Capitol Plaza store.  Beyond that, the aim was for Walmart
to be an anchor store that would lead to the development of the rest of
the site; this did not happen.  If Walmart gets its way and expands, its
larger store and parking lot together will take up a disproportionate
share of Capital Plaza’s 39 acre lot, thereby inhibiting any other use
of the mall.  They also typically include a full-service grocery store,
which would hurt sales at other local businesses.   Walmart has agreed
to meet with community representatives, has agreed that the store will
not be open 24 hours (a major concern for nearby neighbors), but to
ensure that those promises are kept and result in lasting changes means
continuing to organize.  And so those nine goals remain as goals the
Coalition wants Walmart to meet in full.

**Forum Talks: Organizing for a Different Change**

After hearing about past conflicts with Walmart, speakers addressed how
to work for a better outcome in the present.  Dwyer – who led the fight
against Walmart in Duvall village — explained that her involvement began
after being notified that Walmart wanted to open a store that would be
virtually at her front door – a proposal made without any prior
consultation or discussion with those who would have to live with the
consequences.  She took the initiative, talked to her neighbors, and
soon discovered that her opposition was shared.  Organizing from
neighbor to neighbor, doing their own research and so gaining usable
knowledge that could be shared, the voice against Walmart’s plans grew
from one individual to hundreds, leading to the victory – and current
court case – described above.

The experience is relevant to the issues faced at Capital Plaza.  The
Planning Board is pro-development, pro-Walmart, and is unlikely to give
equal weight to community concerns relative to corporate interests. 
Therefore opponents need to create a body of evidence at the hearing,
even if the Planning Board will go along with Walmart’s proposal. 
Although the whole process is constructed as a narrow legal procedure,
ultimately it is a political process – and much will rest on the ability
of concerned communities to make their feelings known and create a body
of evidence at the Planning Board (even if it is ignored) and use that
to mobilize and create political pressure on Prince George’s County
Council.

Dwyer was followed by Callahan who reiterated the Town of Cheverly’s
long-standing support for the Community Standards – and that those nine
standards remain the basis of Cheverly’s opposition to a Super Walmart
at the site.  Cheverly’s mayor is working with the mayors of Landover
Hills (where Capital Plaza is located) and Bladensburg to make
development of the entire mall a condition of support for Walmart
expansion.  Those communities had initially been supportive of Walmart
opening up a store, and now feel let down because it is such an eyesore
and because it hasn’t led to increased local employment opportunities or
the shopping expansion promised and anticipated.  In meetings with local
elected officials and the Coalition, the property owner had claimed
Walmart would attract other businesses, but that hasn’t happened –
though perhaps that is because he has been unwilling to offer the
incentives that mall owners typically provide (outside maintenance,
financial incentives, work on exterior facades, and the like).   If
true, it reflects the adoption of a business model similar to that of
Walmart – pushing costs onto others that are usually borne by a
proprietor.

This need for real, sustainable development is key, Callahan stressed. 
What is at issue isn’t opposing Walmart per se; rather it is to promote
an alternative model of mixed use development, with walkable areas, and
several anchors.  Such a project is what adjacent and nearby communities
want and need.

To allow for the possibility of such an alternative we need to make our
voice heard now, as Augustine stressed in his concluding remarks. 
Explaining the importance of engagement, he recalled Walmart’s
underhanded methods of getting its original application for the store
approved in 2007.  That approval was strongly influenced by a then
recent transplant to Cheverly, Phillip Hoffman, who was elected to the
town council and was a strong proponent of the economic benefits which
would follow if Walmart opened a store in our area.  About six months
after the application was approved he relocated back to Bentonville,
Arkansas where his wife worked as a Walmart Executive Vice President. 
This is an example of a culture of corporate duplicity and manipulative
behavior, of “win” at all costs in pursuit of quick dollars symptomatic
of the entire process.  Neither trust nor honesty are part of Walmart’s
method of expansion.  Only action now can prevent such behavior from
being again rewarded, a sentiment that was repeatedly affirmed in the
subsequent discussion.

**What is to be Done**

There are numerous steps that local residents can take in order to
resist this expansion.  All can speak up and speak out – not as experts
(though we have expertise on our side) but as citizens with rights.  A
broad mobilization is expected for the public Planning Board Hearing
which will be held on May 5.

For more information on this fight and on forms of action Marylanders
can take please read a fuller version of this article posted on the
Progressive Maryland Blog: *Cheverly Residents, Neighbors, Say “No,” to
Walmart expansion as May 5 Hearing Nears* by Kurt Stand, April 16,
2016.  See: 
[*http://www.progressivemaryland.org/cheverly\_residents\_neighbors\_say\_no\_to\_walmart\_expansion\_as\_may\_5\_hearing\_nears*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/cheverly_residents_neighbors_say_no_to_walmart_expansion_as_may_5_hearing_nears)

And for more information on the Duvall Village fight see Another *Prince
George’s Neighborhood Fights a Super Walmart* by Jennifer Dwyer, April
22, 2016 – also posted on the Progressive Maryland Blog:
[*http://www.progressivemaryland.org/another\_prince\_george\_s\_neighborhood\_fights\_a\_super\_walmart*](http://www.progressivemaryland.org/another_prince_george_s_neighborhood_fights_a_super_walmart)
