***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the November 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*FIELD NOTES FROM A CATASTROPHE: The Washington Socialist’s issue on
the November 2014
Elections*](http://dsadc.org/field-notes-from-a-catastrophe-the-washington-socialists-issue-on-the-november-2014-elections/)

Tuesday, November 11th, 2014

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

 

**Welcome to the November issue of *The Washington Socialist*, the
monthly email newsletter of DC Metro Democratic Socialists of America**
–delayed ten days to allow for perspectival coverage of the November 4
election.

DSA’s forays into electoral politics are always done with two sobering
notions firmly in mind. The candidates we endorse and work for are
generally going to be liberals of the better sort, but rarely radicals.
And secondly, it will be very hard to get them in the winner’s circle.
In the dismal climate of the national election, voters appeared to play
it safe across the board in city, county and state politics as well. As
Bill Mosley observes in his overview of the District’s outcome, it was
business as usual. [*Read complete article
*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=73e3e5b0a5&e=003de9ccab)For
socialists, that label has a more concrete meaning: Democrats in their
way are as much a party of business as Republicans, and the influence of
moneyed classes and corporate interests grows ever stronger as the
effects of the wretched Citizens United court decision extend
themselves.

In Maryland, startlingly, it was business as unusual. A slack Democratic
effort at the top and a collapse of turnout in Dem strongholds yielded a
Republican governor, with interesting implications in a state where the
General Assembly remains nominally deep blue but, yep, ensorcelled by
business interests too. So even Maryland has become an explicit site of
struggle. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=afaa94a8e2&e=003de9ccab)

As Dan Adkins points out, the Republic of Northern Virginia held off the
GOP tide through the kind of gerrymandering that we would view with
alarm when done by Republicans (they do it well throughout the rest of
the Old Dominion). But there are a few wrinkles to be noted. [*Read
complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=daf927f87c&e=003de9ccab)

The overall conventional behavior of voters (and those who didn’t)
converges interestingly with the topic covered in our October Socialist
Salon: the fate of Marxist and socialist practice in the post-colonial
regimes of Africa. Frantz Fanon, the Afro-French psychiatrist and author
of *Wretched of the Earth* (gleaned from the Algerian independence
struggle), developed the insight that real liberation, and the practice
that proceeds from it, has to be *taken*, seized violently or lovingly,
by the subject, rather than having it conferred on her or him. The US
voter, separated by several generations from the last broad-scale
struggle for the vote, appears to suffer from the uncertainty about
political and social constraints (or lack of them) that comes from not
having actively *taken* the form of liberation available. The inability
to see one’s own complicity in, and bondage by, capitalism may come from
the absence of this critical step. The threat posed by the new and more
subtle strategies being employed in many states to contain and reduce
the votes of poor and disadvantaged people many revive this sense, one
hopes.

Meanwhile, at our October membership meeting, David Schwartzman of our
kindred organization Committees of Correspondence for Democratic
Socialism laid out a radical vision of solutions to the looming
*uber*-problem of climate change.  Noting that many proposed paths to
lowering carbon emissions largely tinker with the existing growth-driven
global corporate-capitalist regime, Schwartzman argued instead that a
proper solution must “end the rule of capital on the planet.” Andy
Feeney provides a fuller account of Schwartzman’s presentation and
backstory. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/global-green-new-deal-provides-focus-for-oct-11-general-meeting/)

UPCOMING:\
**Nov. 20 is the Socialist Salon**, a discussion of the landscape for
activism in the region after the election. A guest list in formation.
Probably 6:30 at Hunan Dynasty, 215 Penn. Ave. near the Capitol South
metrorail, but check the [*Meetup
site*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=03678fc832&e=003de9ccab)
for updates.\
**DSA membership meeting Saturday Dec. 13** 1:30 p.m. at room A-9, MLK
Main Library, 901 G St. NW. The Steering Committee meets there at noon.
Again, check the [*Meetup
site*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=05abc92b7d&e=003de9ccab)
for updates.

Nov. 15 *Labor Notes* magazine presents a **“troublemakers school”** for
organizers and activists at Foundry UMC in the District. Details at
 *http://www.labornotes.org/events/2014/metro-dc-troublemakers-school*

Nov. 28, massive national Black Friday protests against Walmart. They
begin in DC at 8 a.m. at Union Station; the crowd will march to Walmart
on H Street. Info on the national effort at
[*http://blackfridayprotests.org/*](http://blackfridayprotests.org/)

DSA NATIONAL is interested in our readers knowing about the DSA Legacy
Circle. Everyone reading this, like the writer, is of course intending
to live forever.  But just in case…
[*http://www.dsausa.org/bequests?utm\_campaign=bequest&utm\_medium=email&utm\_source=dsausa*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=2335f3e2b5&e=003de9ccab)

**IN ADDITION TO OUR ELECTION COVERAGE, this edition features:**\
Cornel West, a DSA honorary chair and firebrand, had just returned from
Ferguson, Mo. and official detention when he stirred an audience at
Busboys and Poets with his prophetic fire. Kurt Stand brings an account
of the evening. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=cf48c44ded&e=003de9ccab)

DCDSA’s Socialist Salon in October (as noted above) explored the fate of
socialism in post-colonial Africa in a discussion led by Nicole Gerber.
[*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=943b2b4d7a&e=003de9ccab)

This month’s GOOD READS is more substantial than usual, including many
excellent analyses of that late, lamented election **because you readers
sent in nominations**. Keep it up, folks. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=93c9dd2d4f&e=003de9ccab)

**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*A Call to Action: Cornel West’s Black Prophetic
Fire*](http://dsadc.org/a-call-to-action-cornel-wests-black-prophetic-fire/)

Monday, November 10th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2014**

*By Kurt Stand*

On October 14, Cornel West spoke to a capacity crowd at the 5^th^ and K
Street Busboys and Poets bringing a message of hope and determination in
the struggle for justice, a struggle that has grown sharper in recent
years.  The occasion was publication of West’s new book, *Black
Prophetic Fire* – an exploration of the contemporary relevance of the
legacies left by Frederick Douglass, Ida B. Wells, W.E.B. DuBois, Ella
Baker, Martin Luther King Jr., and Malcolm X.   A set of dialogues with
Christa Buschendorf (a German scholar at the University of
Frankfurt/Main specializing in African-American studies), the work
emphasizes how these figures championed a different, alternative
conception of US democracy by uniting demands for racial and economic
justice.

Rejecting the caricatures and simplifications by which history remembers
them, West reminds us of the prophetic tradition – the “Black Fire”
referred to in the title – within the African American community, a
tradition which strove for liberation from the shackles of racism by
positing a vision of human liberation.   Each leader he discusses, in
his or her own unique way, connected the dots that link the pervasive
social and personal alienation inherent in a system of racial privilege
to the exploitation and violence that pervades everyday life.   Thus, as
they spoke out and organized against the horrors of slavery, lynching,
and segregation, they sought not acceptance into an oppressive system,
but rather social transformation that would make society worthy of
inclusion.   Whether we look at the largely forgotten Ida B. Wells,
whose pioneering role documenting the scourge of lynching served as a
precursor to Progressive Era muckraking, or recall DuBois, whose
towering intellectual importance has been placed in a corner by
anti-Communism, dominant historical narratives leave out the substance
of the struggles for equality that have been at the core of political
struggles throughout our history.

So too, as West emphasizes, the false narrative that sets Malcolm X and
King in opposition to each other becomes a means to avoid the similarity
of their critiques of the underlying structural failings of US society,
becomes a mechanism to reduce social struggles to the personality of
charismatic leaders.  Lost in such retellings of the past is the
extraordinary role of “ordinary” working people whose courage and vision
is what made the civil rights movement possible.  Ella Baker embraced
and embodied that recognition, her leadership role in the civil rights
movement of the 1950s and 60s undervalued by society’s sexism and
misunderstood by those unable to see that genuine leadership means
organizing people to seize the moment themselves.  Her emphasis was
always and ever on grassroots activism, on making real a vision of
participatory democracy – a legacy of particular importance today when
people have been made to feel disempowered.

And in a juxtaposition of that legacy and today’s reality lies West’s
critique – an uncompromising critique — of the Obama Administration and
of those liberals and progressives, especially political and
intellectual leaders in the  black community, who justify the
President’s actions.  The presentation laid particular stress on the
betrayal of the historic anti-war role of black leadership by Obama’s
reliance on war – his use of drones, of assassinations, of bombings – as
a legitimate tool of foreign policy.  This is in contrast to DuBois who
– when over 80 years old — was handcuffed and arrested because of his
refusal to back down from peace activism, and it is in contrast to King
– who broke with Lyndon Johnson, with the AFL-CIO, with “respectable”
civil rights leaders — by denouncing the war in Vietnam, by denouncing
US violence abroad in all its forms.  West reminded us of the need to
remember King for the radical he became, rejecting the “santaclausifed”
version of his convictions by media and politicians alike.  King did not
only condemn the war, he challenged too the belief that the US has
nothing to learn from the rest of the world — the chauvinistic
pretension that has rationalized the imperial foreign policy of Clinton
and Obama alike.

Arrogance over the supposed moral virtues of the US vis-à-vis the rest
of the world of necessity must gloss over the cruelties and hypocrisies
of our criminal justice system, a connection West makes again and
again.  Eric Holder’s unwillingness to indict Bush Administration
torturers presaged the Justice Department’s subsequent refusal to
prosecute the corporate criminals responsible for the 2008 financial
collapse.  That collapse had a particularly devastating impact on the
black community; the class bias in prosecutorial policy as in economic
policy has strengthened inequality between rich and working people, and
intensified the gap between black and white.  West used this analysis to
reinforce his point that a direct confrontation with racism is essential
to overcome all forms of social and economic injustice, that failure to
do the one leads to failure to do the other.  He made that point too by
noting that the other side of the Obama Administration’s unwillingness
to prosecute law-breaking bankers has been its unwillingness to end the
“war on drugs,” with its victimization of people of color, its
unwillingness to end the discriminatory and inhumane practice of
deportation of immigrants.

The picture painted might have been bleak. West acknowledged that he
wrote *Black Prophetic Fire* out of concern that the tradition of black
radicalism was being undermined by support for Obama’s politics of
accommodation. His presentation, however, was given in another spirit
altogether, fueled by the hopefulness of renewal in the mass protests in
Ferguson.  Just returned from there, where he had been arrested in a
civil disobedience protest, West saw in the town’s black youth – and in
the support they have received from across the country — a revival of
mass movements rooted in and growing out of the experience of the
marginalized and dispossessed, breathing new winds to fan the flames of
discontent, bringing forth a new vision of what society could be.

West’s talk struck a chord in that capacity crowd – a crowd that he
challenged by urging them to reject the easy path of acceptance and
instead give content to their individual lives by seeking the harder
path of challenge and commitment.  He called on all to act and thereby
contribute to ending the cycle of war, racism and exploitation that has
defined too much of our nation’s history.  Absent, however, was a sense
of how to bring such change into being.  That, of course, was not the
purpose of West’s talk or his book; he sees his role in presenting a
public challenge by speaking truths that too many in positions of
influence refuse to acknowledge.   Nonetheless, the challenge of how to
turn words into deeds is one that has to be accepted.  Each of the
persons discussed in *Black Prophetic Fire* strove always to maintain a
balance between radicalism and engagement.

The need to condemn liberal accommodation with power while also focusing
fire on right-wing forces that seek to dismantle liberal values is a
challenge that faced the abolitionist movement, the democratic advance
of the Reconstruction years, the highly contradictory Progressivism of
the turn of the century before last, and the dynamics of both the New
Deal and Civil Rights struggles.  This is the challenge facing DSA –
West serving as one of our Honorary Chairs – as it is the challenge
facing the left as a whole in all its forms.  The legacy of engagement
that doesn’t surrender a genuine radicalism, the legacy of a radicalism
based on the hopes, dreams and actions of working people, of a
radicalism that builds unity by directly challenging racism and all
forms of oppression is the legacy of Douglass, Wells, DuBois, Baker,
King and Malcolm that West brought to light.  It is a legacy to use in
building the movement for peace, justice, equality and freedom, in the
building of a socialist movement today.

[*Global Green New Deal” Provides Focus for Oct. 11 General
Meeting*](http://dsadc.org/global-green-new-deal-provides-focus-for-oct-11-general-meeting/)

Monday, November 10th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* November 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

A warning that time is rapidly running out on efforts to control global
climate change, coupled with hope that a Global Green New Deal to
accomplish the necessary energy transition could bring about better
lives for almost everyone, were two of the main messages that Dr. David
Schwartzman, a professor emeritus at Howard University, delivered to the
Metro DC DSA general membership meeting held on Oct. 11.

The meeting drew 14 attendees, several of whom were new to DSA.  It was
mostly focused on Schwartzman’s somewhat abbreviated presentation of
[*an extensive
PowerPoint*](http://www.redandgreen.org/Documents/David/Schwartzman_GND.pdf)
he has created on the climate crisis and the need for “eco-socialist
revolution” to counter it.

In his presentation, Schwartzman departed significantly from the
positions that many radical environmentalists have taken on the need for
an end to global economic growth and total growth in human energy
consumption to bring climate change under control.  He argued instead
that for all of humanity to achieve a “state of the art/science” quality
of life now enjoyed by people in the wealthiest capitalist countries as
well as Cuba, whose average expected lifespan now approaches that of the
capitalist West, total energy consumption worldwide must grow from 18
terawatts or TW – i.e., 18 quadrillion watts – annually, with is its
current level, to some 25 TW in the future.  This would average out to a
minimum of about 3.5 kilowatts per person of energy consumption per
year.

However, Schwartzman argued, with adequate investments in wind power, in
ever-more-efficient solar photovoltaic cells and in concentrated solar
thermal power plants located in places like the Sahara Desert, “a
global-scale transition can be achieved in no more than 30 years, ending
with zero anthropogenic carbon emissions” – i.e. with zero emissions of
carbon from human economic activities.

To achieve this goal, he said, the world would need to invest roughly
1-2 percent of our current annual energy consumption, about 85 percent
of which currently comes from fossil fuels, in the development of wind
and solar power sources each year.  Once the necessary investments were
made, however, annual energy consumption needs would drop, and timely
investments in energy conservation and energy efficiency would help
speed the transition.

As Schwartzman sees the shift from our current world economy – dependent
on a “Military Industrial Fossil Fuel Nuclear State Terror and
Surveillance Complex” or “MIC”— to a sustainable world order in which an
extensive military apparatus is not required to protect western
capitalism’s access to fossil fuels, it would require that total energy
consumption decreased in the United States and in some other highly
carbon-dependent countries.   At the same time, however, energy
consumption – and possibly even fossil fuel consumption – would need to
increase in many of the poorer nations of the world that now suffer from
too little energy consumption and shorter average lifespans.

In addition to energy consumption rising in order to enable all
societies to achieve state of the art living standards, additional
energy consumption would be needed to clean up the pollution and other
kinds of environmental damage caused by the MIC over the past several
centuries, to repair infrastructure projects around the world and to
establish Green Cities, Schwartzman said. Still more energy must be
invested in the sequestering or removal of carbon from the atmosphere
through the use of solar technologies and “agroecology” technologies
such as permaculture.

The development of solar and wind energy technologies and a turn from
industrial agricultural methods that are highly depended on fossil fuels
to permaculture and other forms of agroecology that are environmentally
sustainable will in themselves help to promote eco-socialist revolution
by undermining the MIC and radically altering existing technologies,
somewhat as Marx predicted long ago in discussing the revolutionary
nature of capitalist technology, Schwartzman suggested.

In addition to breaking with some forms of radical environmental
thinking, however, his vision for a Global Green New Deal also departs
from what some eco-socialists have written on the subject of climate
change.   For example, in *Monthly Review* magazine and in his book *The
Ecological Rift*, eco-socialist John Bellamy Foster has repeatedly
argued against the idea that “green capitalism” can bring about a
transition to a sustainable economy.  In his PowerPoint presentation to
DSA, Schwartzman indicated that green capitalism and market forces alone
will not do the job, but added the prevention of catastrophic climate
*change* or C3 “must begin now!” – a fact that will require some
cooperation with green capitalist entrepreneurs, or at least no attempts
to block them.

The development of an eco-socialist transition to a sustainable world
economy will require “multidimensional class struggle” at every level of
society, from the classroom to the planet, and will require and draw on
actions against every form of oppression, whether based in class or on
race, ethnicity, religion, differing degrees of ability or age,
 Schwartzman stated.  As part of that multidimensional class struggle,
eco-socialists need to make “alliances, albeit temporary, with so-called
green capital” to undermine and isolate the MIC complex.

Humanity has very little time remaining to launch a Global Green New
Deal, the PowerPoint presentation suggested.   Climate scientist James
Hansen has stated that a rise of 2 degrees Centigrade above global
pre-industrial average temperatures is the limit of what can occur
without severe risks of triggering climate-related disasters, and most
researchers agree that to achieve an average temperature rise of just 2
degrees C, the loading of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in
the atmosphere must be brought down to no more than 350 ppm.  The
current level is more than 400 ppm.  Studies cited in Schwartzman’s
presentation have concluded that heading off truly dangerous climate
change will require drastic reductions in current levels of CO2
emissions within four or five years – a goal that the nations of the
earth are nowhere near to reaching as of today.

Nevertheless, Schwartzman concluded, this warning “must be coupled with
hope.”  The hope lies in the fact that an effective program to curb CO2
and other greenhouse gas emissions could result in “a much better life
for all” in the form of the Global Green New Deal, “with the capacity to
deliver clean air and clean water, organic food, meaningful employment
and more free creative time for all on this planet.”

A lively discussion followed, which continued somewhat past the
meeting’s official closing time.  Readers interested in accessing his
PowerPoint can find it
[*here*](http://www.redandgreen.org/Documents/David/Schwartzman_GND.pdf).
Several articles by Schwartzman can be found
[*here*](http://solarutopia.org/)

[*Good Reads for Socialists in
November*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-in-november/)

Monday, November 10th, 2014

**GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS: NOVEMBER 2014**

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2014**

Janet Yellen, the Fed chief, spoke at length on inequality and its
remedies in a speech in Boston Oct. 17. Remedies identified included
reducing the cost of higher ed or at least the unsupported cost and its
effect on student debt burdens. The full text of this quite interesting
and under-reported speech is at
[*http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20141017a.htm*](http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20141017a.htm)

A *New York Times* account of the speech is at
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/18/business/yellen-warns-of-inequality-threat.html?ref=business*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/18/business/yellen-warns-of-inequality-threat.html?ref=business)

A later debate at the *NYT* on the Fed’s role in remedying inequality
includes Joseph Stiglitz among others:
http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2014/10/27/what-could-the-fed-do-to-address-inequality

Naomi Klein’s new book, *This Changes Everything*, is getting plenty of
traction with reviewers. Here’s one from the website “Climate and
Capitalism,” an appropriate venue…\
[*http://climateandcapitalism.com/2014/10/19/naomi-klein-climate-change-mass-social-movements-can-save-us/*](http://climateandcapitalism.com/2014/10/19/naomi-klein-climate-change-mass-social-movements-can-save-us/)

Here’s a piece by Klein from *In These Times*, reappearing on the Bill
Moyers site…\
[*http://billmoyers.com/2014/10/14/can-climate-change-unite-left/*](http://billmoyers.com/2014/10/14/can-climate-change-unite-left/)

Without mentioning Klein’s book, Christian Parenti’s article in the most
recent DISSENT contests her notion that total political transformation –
an end of capitalism — is the prerequisite and sole path to restraining
climate change.

[*http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/a-radical-approach-to-the-climate-crisis*](http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/a-radical-approach-to-the-climate-crisis)

The *New York Times* review of Klein’s book is by Rob Nixon:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/09/books/review/naomi-klein-this-changes-everything-review.html?smid=fb-share

 

Cecilio Morales’s article on worksharing in the Labor Day issue finds an
echo in this piece from *The Nation: *

[*http://www.thenation.com/blog/183505/work-sharing-socialist-alternative-layoffs\#*](http://www.thenation.com/blog/183505/work-sharing-socialist-alternative-layoffs)

Why do diseases like Ebola hang around to torment societies again and
again? Geography, capitalist practice and the color of the victims are
all clearly implicated. One take on capitalism’s role by Niles
Williamson at the World Socialist Web Site (Fourth International):

[*http://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2014/11/01/pers-n01.html*](http://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2014/11/01/pers-n01.html)

 

 

Prince George’s County is considering a “ban the box” regulation that
forbids asking a job applicant about a criminal record on the paper
application. Business interests in the county are pushing back and
trying to amend it, as the *WaPo* reports here:
[*http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/md-politics/pr-georges-bill-would-bar-questions-about-criminal-convictions-on-job-applications/2014/10/21/6a2e8e20-58a2-11e4-8264-deed989ae9a2\_story.html*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/md-politics/pr-georges-bill-would-bar-questions-about-criminal-convictions-on-job-applications/2014/10/21/6a2e8e20-58a2-11e4-8264-deed989ae9a2_story.html)

The “ban the box” impulse is getting traction around the nation because
it reduces incarceration and aids re-employment of returning citizens.
D.C. has passed a version; this *NY Times* article shows the breadth of
the movement:
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/24/us/a-plan-to-cut-costs-and-crime-curb-bias-against-ex-convicts.html?ref=politics*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/24/us/a-plan-to-cut-costs-and-crime-curb-bias-against-ex-convicts.html?ref=politics)

 

Sam Pizzigati’s excellent newsletter from IPS on inequality, “Too Much,”
outlines the recent program kicked off by Oxfam called “Even It Up,” a
systematic path to reducing the overwhelming disparity between the very
rich and the bulk of the planet’s poor. Plus (in the same Nov. 3
edition), some real-estate porn…\
[*http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html*](http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html)

Catherine Rampell is proving to be the *WaPo*’s best opinion-page asset
after Harold Meyerson. This piece on the deep injustice of the tipped
labor “carve-out” in the halting march of minimum-wage activism is a
good example; she might have noted that Maryland’s disappointing state
minimum-wage hike included a similar carve-out by craven legislators.

[*http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/catherine-rampell-tipped-workers-are-being-left-out-of-the-wage-debate/2014/11/06/0c6f41a6-65f1-11e4-9fdc-d43b053ecb4d\_story.html*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/catherine-rampell-tipped-workers-are-being-left-out-of-the-wage-debate/2014/11/06/0c6f41a6-65f1-11e4-9fdc-d43b053ecb4d_story.html)

When the dismal election aftermath was still only a gleam in the GOP’s
eye, Steven Pearlstein was already skewering the Democrats for
chickening out of putting their best foot forward, and why it meant they
would stumble and fall. Thanks to Dave Richardson and Kurt Stand for
unearthing this one…

[*http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/10/31/democrats-only-have-themselves-to-blame-for-upcoming-losses/*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/10/31/democrats-only-have-themselves-to-blame-for-upcoming-losses/)

Gar Alperovitz provides a long-view assessment of the 2014 election
results that suggests change is happening outside the orbit of national
politics – especially in cities.\
[*http://truth-out.org/opinion/item/27305-playing-the-long-game*](http://truth-out.org/opinion/item/27305-playing-the-long-game)

Local co-chair Jose Gutierrez points us to more election analysis, from
*The Nation*, from Bill Fletcher Jr. (via the national DSA website) and
a great breakdown from Rich Yesselson in *Jacobin*:

[*http://m.thenation.com/blog/188185-weed-legal-capital-and-6-other-reasons-election-wasnt-total-bust*](http://m.thenation.com/blog/188185-weed-legal-capital-and-6-other-reasons-election-wasnt-total-bust)

[*http://www.dsausa.org/dl\_a\_few\_quick\_thoughts\_on\_the\_november\_4th\_election*](http://www.dsausa.org/dl_a_few_quick_thoughts_on_the_november_4th_election)

[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/11/six-points-on-the-midterm-elections/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/11/six-points-on-the-midterm-elections/)

Ezra Klein, from his pulpit at VOX, rags on Democrats for their excuses
about the late lamented election, in the now familiar five-myths
format:\
[*http://www.vox.com/2014/11/5/7156913/5-myths-2014*](http://www.vox.com/2014/11/5/7156913/5-myths-2014)

And the unsinkable Brooke Gladstone interviewed Klein about his
five-myths article in On the Media, the NPR show (it’s on Sunday
afternoons on WAMU):\
[*https://www.wnyc.org/radio/\#/ondemand/412319*](https://www.wnyc.org/radio/#/ondemand/412319)

 

[*GOP on top tier brings challenges for Md.
Democrats*](http://dsadc.org/gop-on-top-tier-brings-challenges-for-md-democrats/)

Monday, November 10th, 2014

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Marylanders awoke to a strange landscape on Nov. 5 – one with a quite
unexpected Republican victor in the governor’s race. Larry Hogan’s
one-note campaign on taxes appeared to have registered with many
Maryland voters, especially white working-class Democrats from outside
the Democratic strongholds of Baltimore City and Prince George’s and
Montgomery counties.

But those voters on the Eastern Shore and in Southern and Western
Maryland may have been easier to nudge, taxes aside, because the
Democratic candidate, Anthony Brown, would have been the state’s first
African American governor. Hogan’s task was also eased [*because those
Democratic strongholds had poor
turnout*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/campaign-2014/bs-md-how-hogan-won-20141105-story.html)
in the non-presidential year.

The *Baltimore Sun*’s Michael Dresser reported “In Baltimore \[City\],
about 35,000 fewer voters turned out than four years ago — and Brown won
a smaller percentage of the city vote than Gov. Martin O’Malley did
then. Some 50,000 fewer people voted in Montgomery this time, and 30,000
fewer in Brown’s home county of Prince George’s.” That roughly
115,000-vote shortfall goes a long way toward explaining Hogan’s
76,000-vote margin of victory.

The tax issue is fast becoming \[in urban legend\] the issue that sank
Brown and elected Hogan – even in the *New Yorker,* which in a
gazing-from-afar piece by Kelefah Sannah recycled some conventional
wisdom, bought the GOP’s anti-tax frame and concluded that Democrats
have given voters “the sense that Democratic politicians don’t hate
taxes as much as they do.”

Democrats retained their overwhelming advantage in the General Assembly,
in contrast to Brown’s fortunes statewide. But in a year when one-third
of all delegate seats were open due to retirements or attempts at
different offices, Republicans scrapped for advantage statewide and
added two seats in the Senate and seven in the House of Delegates. Some
ongoing progressive campaigns for legislation may be emperiled.

The champion and sponsor of the Earned Sick Leave bill, John Olszewski,
tried to move up from his delegate seat in increasingly Republican
Baltimore County into an open Senate seat vacated by the retirement of
Sen. Norman Stone. He lost to GOP candidate Johnny Salling, and his
district became solidly GOP as all three delegate seats went Republican,
including of course his former seat. At least one other Democratic
delegate, Mary-Dulany James of Harford County, also tried to trade up to
an open Senate seat from which a Republican had retired, but also lost;
the Democrats dropped from 35 of 47 to 33 of 47 seats in the upper
chamber.  A veto-proof majority was, however, retained, giving the
Democrats a considerable lever against the new executive’s power to
dictate the terms of the state budget.

Jolene Ivey, a Prince George’s delegate who left her seat to run for
lieutenant governor, was also a strong and influential advocate for the
sick leave bill, which will be introduced for the third time in the 2015
session. Advocates of the bill will be searching for new champions. Ivey
was the running mate of Doug Gansler, the former attorney general who
unsuccessfully challenged Brown for the Democratic gubernatorial nod.

Still, labor and social justice advocates are somewhat upbeat. One
veteran top labor staffer recalled that a fighting spirit was kindled in
House Speaker Mike Busch and Senate President Mike Miller by the
ideological fervor of Bob Ehrlich, the last Republican governor. “We got
more bills passed \[in Ehrlich’s four years\] than with Democrats… we
couldn’t write bills fast enough.”

Likewise, Chesapeake Climate Action Network director Mike Tidwell argued
that the climate change movement in the state should greet the electoral
setback by “going on offense \[and\] double down” on the effort,
planning a campaign to statutorily increase the percentage of renewables
in the state’s energy mix from 20 percent to 40 percent in the next
decade, as well as to keep fracking of natural gas out of Maryland. At a
Sierra Club legislative briefing Saturday, Nov. 8, state activists
agreed on those priorities among others, though cautious about how
committee assignments might develop with so many new delegates.

Transit and smart growth activists in the D.C. suburbs are concerned
about the fate of the Purple Line light rail that would connect
Montgomery and Prince George’s. Hogan has suggested he would rather
spend the money on roads. His running mate, former federal (G.W. Bush)
and Maryland (Ehrlich) cabinet minion Boyd Rutherford[*, said in the
lieutenant governors’ candidates’ one
debate*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-lt-governor-debate-20141016-story.html)
“No Purple Line, not at this particular time ….  I would not lose sleep
if it was canceled completely, put it that way.”

The Purple Line has David Alpert in “Greater Greater Washington”… “If
Hogan kills the \[Purple Line\] project, he’ll be turning down likely
federal dollars that won’t go to other Maryland priorities, and he’ll be
disappointing many voters in a much more visceral way than under
Ehrlich.”

He goes on to quote another activist: “David Moon, an organizer who once
ran the Purple Line Now campaign and was just elected to the House of
Delegates from the Silver Spring/Takoma Park area, said, ‘You’re not
going to be able to \[win Hogan over\] from a regional DC-suburban
perspective, or a liberal transit versus roads perspective,” or the
environment (he ran against a stormwater fee calling it a “rain tax”).’
But if businesses are willing to stand up for infrastructure that will
generate economic growth, he said, that is more compelling.

Alpert points out that Virginia’s business community, though low-tax
advocates, nevertheless support building new infrastructure, much of the
most recent happening in a generally Republican political environment.
Will Maryland’s business community bring that message to Hogan? Some
“businesspeople remain focused on tax rates and only tax rates as the
only factor behind economic competitiveness,” Alpert wrote. “But study
after study has shown that millennials are not looking for the cheapest
place to live; they want a desirable one (that’s affordable, but usually
it’s scarce real estate, not taxes, that make it unaffordable).

“Tax rates matter, but so does infrastructure. The Purple Line would
boost Montgomery County, the state of Maryland, and the region. The Red
Line would do the same for Baltimore. It would be short-sighted and not
fiscally prudent to cancel these projects.” The *WaPo*’s first editorial
exhortation to Hogan, delivered only three days after the election,
sounded this note. But will Hogan hear that from business allies (other
than the pathetically pro-corporate *WaPo*, that is)?

The new governor’s very earliest personnel moves were ominous. Lt.
Gov.-elect Rutherford joins a veteran of both Bob Ehrlich and Parris
Glendening transition teams, [*Jim
Brady*](http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2010-02-28/business/bal-qa0228_1_james-t-brady-edf-group-constellation-energy),
as Hogan’s two-person transition team. Brady is not a reassuring figure
either; he worked for the Democrat, Glendening, in the ‘90s as secretary
of economic and business development but broke with the then-governor
over his opposition to the wretched Inter-County Connector and became a
Republican – a serious move in Maryland, where many Democrats are
pro-business Republicans in spirit but stick with the dominant political
culture. Brady is now a consultant and seat-warmer on corporate boards
including the rapacious Constellation Energy, boding ill for
environmental and alternative energy concerns during the transition and
especially if he joins the administration.

A Chesapeake Climate Action Network organizer told a crowd in Greenbelt
the night after the election that the next governor “doesn’t believe in
climate change or the science behind it.” Problems for the renewable
portfolio standard upgrade, for continued resistance to fracking in
Maryland, bay cleanup and the offshore wind project are likely; at the
very least, any partnerships with the private sector (for instance, the
offshore wind project) will likely be much more to developers’ advantage
than (even) under O’Malley.

Metro DC DSA steering committee member Kurt Stand in Cheverly reports
“Despite the many defeats registered in the mid-term elections in
Maryland, some gains were made in Prince George’s County. Alongside
Senator Victor Ramirez, District 47a elected former Colmar Manor Mayor
Diana Fennell and longtime union activist Jimmy Tarlau as delegates; the
three agreeing to work as a team.  In a letter to supporters, written
under the heading ‘A Bittersweet Election Day,’ Tarlau explained that
his initial focus will be on developing a progressive caucus to last the
long-haul.  He added, ‘I know that it will be more difficult to get
things accomplished with a Republican governor, but I did not think
getting progressive legislation passed and signed into law would be easy
with a Democratic governor either.  It will take a movement pressuring
legislators to get good things passed, and encouraging more union
members and other activists to run for political office.  There are no
shortcuts.’ ”

Alternative parties were active in this Maryland election. A libertarian
candidate for governor polled near double digits. In Montgomery’s
Takoma-Silver Spring legislative district, Green Party candidate Dan
Robinson polled a very respectable 9-plus percent, but trailed
newcomer-winner David Moon, running as a Democrat. Green candidate Tim
Willard, in a Montgomery County Council at-large race crowded with
candidates including progressive stalwart Marc Elrich, was less
successful at 2 percent. Tom Hucker, a former leader of Progressive
Maryland and two-term delegate, tried successfully for a council seat in
Montgomery.

Prince George’s had only two competitive County Council races and
remains business-friendly with the exceptions of Mary Lehman, an
incumbent, and Danielle Glaros, who secured the seat of outgoing
progressive Eric Olson, for who she was chief of staff. Deni Tavares, a
protégé of Sen. Victor Ramirez, also won a council seat and arrives with
progressive credentials but her future depends on her not being absorbed
into the overall pro-development culture of the rest of the council.

Both of DC’s suburban counties have African-American county executives
who talk a progressive game but have had a hard time shaking free of the
pro-development culture, as well. Rushern Baker was unopposed in Prince
George’s and Ike Leggett cruised easily past a Republican challenger in
Montgomery. Montgomery tends to extract more concessions from their
developers than does Prince George’s, but a commitment to public works
for public goods is – in keeping with the current age and culture – less
common in either than is healthy for governance. The degree to which
both jurisdictions fight for the Purple Line and other overtly public
activities under a Republican governor will reveal much.

[*IN MOSTLY DISMAL DC ELECTION RESULTS, SOME HOPE FOR
PROGRESSIVES*](http://dsadc.org/in-mostly-dismal-dc-election-results-some-hope-for-progressives/)

Monday, November 10th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

Given the outcome of the Nov. 4 DC local election that mostly affirmed
the status quo, one has to look beneath the surface to find a sliver of
hope for more progressive politics in DC.  Nevertheless there are
positive signs in a mostly bleak landscape.

Surely the results at the top of the ballot were nothing to cheer about,
with Democrat Muriel Bowser cruising to victory by 19 percentage points
over David Catania.  Many thought Catania would at least make the race
close, but in the end Bowser’s identity as a Democrat and African
American trumped that of the white, openly gay and
Republican-turned-independent Catania.  Carol Schwartz, another
independent who was once Republican, didn’t muster enough votes to even
play spoiler.  The race was full of style and mostly devoid of
substance, with the sharp differences in personality between the top
three candidates masking what was largely a void of distinction between
their platforms.  All three were largely business-friendly moderates
with liberal stances on social issues.  With so little on the line,
Metro-DC DSA took a pass on endorsing anyone for mayor, and DC voters
went with the safe choice.

The sound and fury of the mayoral race almost drowned out more
interesting down-ballot contests.  The most contentious was the race for
at-large councilmember, with 15 candidates vying for two seats.  It was
foreordained that the Democrat, Anita Bonds, would win one of the seats,
and she did with 24 percent of the overall vote despite her lackluster
record and absence of nearly any significant endorsements (except from
her fellow Democratic officeholders) or enthusiasm among voters for
her.  The real contest was for the second seat, one reserved for a
non-Democrat.  Metro-DC DSA endorsed and campaigned for two candidates
running explicitly left-progressive platforms:  Eugene Puryear of the
Statehood Green Party and Graylan Hagler, running as an independent. 
Despite vigorous campaigns by both, Puryear finished sixth with 3.5
percent of the vote, and Hagler seventh with 3.0.  Winning the second
seat, formerly held by Catania, was Elissa Silverman, formerly a
reporter for the *Washington Post* and *Washington City Paper*, with 12
percent.

Puryear’s and Hagler’s finishes are disappointing, but DSA members can
take heart that Silverman branded herself as a progressive, albeit one
who appealed more to newer (and whiter) DC residents.  While Puryear and
Hagler emphasized issues of greater concern to long-time and
lower-income DC residents, such as affordable housing, job creation and
fairness for returning citizens, Silverman ran on a good-government
platform that highlighted eliminating corporate contributions to local
candidates and improving transportation.  Silverman captured many of the
voters who were partial to Tommy Wells, outgoing councilmember and
unsuccessful candidate for the Democratic nomination for mayor, who
embraced the “livable, walkable” vision of DC favored by younger,
upwardly mobile migrants to the city.  In addition, she started her
campaign with more name recognition than most of the candidates, having
run in last year’s special election for Council that was won by Bonds.

The fact that candidates feel the need to advertise themselves as
progressives – at one point, Catania even argued he and not Bowser was
the real progressive in the race – bespeaks of a DC where progressive
politics matter and voters on the left need to at least be appeased, if
not actively catered to.  A Bowser administration, and the new Council
that will work with her, will be heavily influenced by developers and
other wealthy interests with business before the city.  But they will go
to great lengths not to appear to be in the pockets of the wealthy, and
it is this fact that gives DSA and other progressive organizations a
voice, if not genuine leverage.  Likewise, the four Democrats who won
easy election to four Council seats to represent Wards 1, 3,5 and 6 all
identify as liberal-to-progressive, though it will be the duty of real
progressives to hold their feet the fire on the issues.

We also can take heart that two genuine progressive (and DSA-endorsed)
candidates won easy re-election:  Eleanor Holmes Norton as delegate to
Congress and Phil Mendelson as chair of the DC Council.  We can take
somewhat less solace that Karl Racine, a partner in the corporate law
firm Venable, will become the first elected DC attorney general.  The DC
political establishment lined up behind Racine to snuff out the
candidacies of more feisty, independent-minded candidates such as
labor-friendly Edward “Smitty” Smith, DC voting-rights advocate Lorie
Masters and Paul Zukerberg, whose lawsuit forced the election to happen
in the first place.

The overwhelming “yes” vote in the initiative to fully legalize
marijuana is also a victory for social-justice advocates.  Backers of
the initiative framed it as a matter of racial and economic justice,
given the fact that minority and low-income communities have borne the
brunt of arrests and convictions for marijuana possession although its
use is well-distributed among ethnicities and social classes.

There are other possibilities for liberals and progressives.  With
Silverman replacing Catania, the Council’s center of gravity moves just
a bit to the left, given her priority of reducing the influence of
corporate cash in local elections.  In addition, the proposed transfer
of the Reeves Center to developers as part of a deal for a new soccer
stadium could get heightened scrutiny, given Bowser’s professed
skepticism of the idea.

The next step is for DSA and other progressive organizations who played
a role in the election to turn lemons into lemonade – to use the energy
generated by the outspoken but unsuccessful Puryear and Hagler
campaigns, and the clear desire among most DC voters for a government
that represents the majority and not top 1 percent, to build a left
political force that will capture not only hearts but enough votes for
victory.

[*Socialism’s development in Africa traced at
Salon*](http://dsadc.org/socialisms-development-in-africa-traced-at-salon/)

Monday, November 10th, 2014

 

***The Washington Socialist** &lt;&gt;* **November 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

In the heady decades when African nations shook off the colonial yoke
and established indigenous rule, radical ideas struggled to get traction
in an environment of big-power Cold War competition – and of reflexive
resistance to those ideas, including socialism and Marxism, that
Africans associated with the colonial powers.

Figures like Kwame Nkrumah and Julius Nyerere were frequently stymied in
their attempts to bring a version of socialism to new nations still
pummeled by extractive exploitation of resources, as DSA members heard
from Nicole Gerber at the October Socialist Salon. Gerber, recently
returned from Guinea, explained how deep local culture and lingering
hatred of colonial influence complicated the natural flowering of
radical ideas in societies newly able to seek their own paths.

Gerber outlined the varied pattern of nationalist models as one former
colony after the other gained independence during the middle of the last
century.  Many icons of African liberation were radicals and/or
socialists, and many of those had been educated in the West. But strong
currents of African identity and mistrust of Western politics, theory
and values complicated their attempts to fashion political structures
that would work with the economic conditions of post-colonial nations.

Nationalist sensibilities were also pulled two ways, Gerber noted.
What’s often described as a divisive tribalism is said to have fractured
national ties that were the residua of boundaries imposed by imperial
powers. Gerber observed that tribal divides were often in fact economic
class divides. In the opposite direction, many of the early leaders of
the new nations subscribed to varying degrees to PanAfricanist ideals
that asserted there would be no progress without continental unity in
the face of external threats of imperialism and capitalist exploitation.

Gerber’s discussion was complemented by documents she furnished on
request to Salon participants. They displayed the spectrum of socialist
and other ideals held by leaders of the independence era. Julius Nyerere
of Tanzania, for instance, got his socialism studying at Edinburgh
University but was the originator of “*ujamaa*,” a communitarian
socialism he asserted was rooted in precolonial African social practice.
“…communal ownership of land is traditional in our country-it was the
concept of freehold which had been foreign to them,” he said in *Essays
on Socialism* (1977). Kwame Nkrumah, who led colonial Gold Coast to
become Ghana, was educated in the US. He similarly cited a precolonial
golden age: “We know that the traditional African society was founded on
principles of egalitarianism. In its actual workings, however, it had
various shortcomings. Its humanist impulse, nevertheless, is something
that continues to urge us towards our all-African socialist
reconstruction.” Nkrumah, like Nyerere a PanAfricanist, asserted “the
economic development of the continent must be planned and pursued as a
whole. A loose confederation designed only for economic co-operation
would not provide the necessary unity of purpose.”

Patrice Lumumba was a longtime agitator for freedom of the Belgian Congo
and presided briefly over national liberation, but in less than a year
was ousted and then murdered by dissident forces associated with the
mineral-rich secessionist region of Katanga, probably with the
complicity of Western mining interests and of the US CIA. His enormous
new nation, he warned, could be troubled by just such fragmenting: ““I
ask you all to sink your tribal quarrels: they weaken us and may cause
us to be despised abroad,” he said at his inaugural.

Sekou Toure, who was the longtime strongman of Guinea, brought socialist
ideas and perhaps ideals to the liberation struggle but was called a
“hardliner” by many and “hero and tyrant” by one biographer. He was for
years before assuming power a labor leader and his ability to keep labor
quiescent appeared important to his longevity in power, far outlasting
his allies Lumumba and Nkrumah. Both Nyerere and Nkrumah resorted to
suppressing labor unions later in their tenures, and the strife that
caused is credited by some with their eventual loss of power. Amilcar
Cabral, a theoretician of Guinea-Bissau, was also steeped in labor
activism and that conditioned his influential strategic writing, where
Frantz Fanon, a psychiatrist, was more inclined to a Mao-like faith in
peasant activism, in an Algeria where French colonists were there to
stay and dominated the bourgeois and working-class culture.

Gerber’s account and the discussion that followed traced some of the
crosscurrents of African liberation movements’ and leaders’ struggle to
adapt socialist principles to the realities of post-colonial Africa.

 

*The Socialist Salon, generally held at 6:30 p.m. the third Thursday of
the month at a local restaurant, is an opportunity for DSA members and
others to explore and share radical ideas, themes, traditions and
solutions in an informal setting. Check our Meetup site.*

[*Virginia Holds the Line, but . .
.*](http://dsadc.org/virginia-holds-the-line-but-2/)

Monday, November 10th, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; November 2014**

*By Dan Adkins*

The good news in the recent election is that Virginia voters did not
lose any of their national Democratic representatives.  They retained
their three House representatives partly because gerrymandering made it
difficult to lose even though the turnout was only 37 percent.

Senator Mark Warner won his dramatic election.  When he ran in 2008,
Warner got 65 percent of the vote as opposed to the 49 percent he got
this time.  The senator’s commitment to bipartisanship and mild support
of more progressive issues may not have allowed him to mobilize his base
as some of his staff urged.  The political environment has changed since
2008.

The electorate is focused on their lack of economic gains, and when
Democrats like Sen. Warner do not seem to answer these concerns they are
losing votes big time.  When 63 percent of respondents in a CNN poll
believe that the economy is favoring the rich, a call to bipartisanship
and compromise may seem like surrender.  Over 60 percent of Americans
believe the minimum wage needs to be raised but there is not a national
Democratic push for this.  The hope for the future is that the
Democratic Party must begin to take on inequality or lose more voters.

The Independent Green Party (IG) made a great show by receiving over
30,000 votes.  The Libertarian Party got 47,000 votes.  The IG party was
influenced by the German Green Party when some military members were
based in Germany.  The IG may have a higher proportion of women and
colonels running for office than any other party in Virginia.  Its
members come from all parts of the political spectrum and strongly
support renewables, rail transportation, fiscally conservative budgets,
energy efficiency and energy self-sufficiency.  For those who wonder
about a military-friendly green party, For those who wonder about a
military-friendly green party, just remember that our military has been
testing renewable fuels and deploying renewable installations while
predicting that climate change will add to global instabilities.
