***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the May 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the May Day edition of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-may-day-edition-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Thursday, May 1st, 2014

 

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}Welcome to the
May edition of the *Washington Socialist*, monthly email newsletter of
the Metro DC Local of Democratic Socialists of America. We trust that
your May Day is/has been the best and that some thought is bent to the
internationalness and workerness of the holiday.

A cascade of conflicts led to the cancellation of the April general
membership meeting and a postponement of elections to the Steering
Committee. **That election will take place at the May meeting** at the
Cleveland Park Library, 3310 Connecticut Ave NW, Saturday, May 10. The
membership meeting and election are at 2:30; the steering committee
meets at 1:00. Best Metrorail exit is Cleveland Park, about two blocks
walk. Updates to this information are at our local’s [*Meetup site
.*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/)

Bill Mosley reminds us that Metro-DC Democratic Socialists of America is
a sponsor of DC Laborfest, a month-long festival of film, theater,
history, poetry, music, books and art celebrating the U.S. labor
movement past and present.

The annual festival, organized by the Metro Washington Council, AFL-CIO,
kicks off May 1 with a wreath-laying in Silver Spring to honor legendary
labor organizer Mary Harris “Mother” Jones’ 184^th^ birthday. Other
highlights include a film at AFL-CIO headquarters on labor
organizer/artist Ralph Fasanella, along with an exhibit on his works at
the Smithsonian’s American Art Museum; a tribute to Pete Seeger by
organizer/singer Joe Uehlein; and a showing of *The Salt of the Earth*,
the legendary film on the struggles of Mexican/American workers.

Most of the festival’s films will be shown at AFI Silver Theatre in
Silver Spring. Other events will take place at various locations in the
Washington area. Visit [*www.dclabor.org*](http://www.dclabor.org) for a
complete schedule and ticket prices.

IN THIS MAY DAY ISSUE:

April’s Socialist Salon, our monthly get-together, was one of the most
fertile and productive in memory. The subject was the sometimes
bewildering anatomy of today’s socialist Left, and detailed handouts
prepared by members were the germ of a productive confab. To keep that
conversation going, the *Washington Socialist* leads this issue with a
**descriptive catalog of socialist left organizations** in the US.
[*Read complete article*](http://dsadc.org)

In June, we’ll follow up with an essay on the history of the US Left
that attempts to trace the lineage of today’s organizations from the
early days. The essay, by frequent contributor Andy Feeney, will be
curated and commented upon by other participants in the Salon – and by
readers of the *Washington Socialist*, who are invited to chime in at
whatever length and level of detail you choose. Subsequent issues will
explore different thematic takes on the unfortunately divided US Left,
with an emphasis on DSA’s place in the dissonant choir. Salons,
generally the third Thursday of each month, are also noted on the Meetup
page.\
**Also in this issue:**

Kurt Stand gives us a deep, rich portrait of **the annual Split This
Rock poetry slam** in in downtown D.C. and its roots in the poetry of
rebellion, class consciousness and oppression going back to Shelley and
the Romantics.[ *Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/poetry-in-motionpoetry-as-resistance-split-this-rock-festival/)

Bill Mosley, in an annual tradition, reminds us of the **value of May
Day**. David Duhalde reminds us that other nations celebrate May Day in
different ways. His trip to Vietnam bore that out, but in a fashion that
one wouldn’t always expect. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/happy-international-workers-day-the-real-labor-day/)

Bill Boteler takes on the latest voluminous report by the
**Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change** (IPCC), the UN-authorized
group of scientists whose work in recent years has set the template for
serious scientific approaches to the many threats implicit in rising
temperatures due to human use of fossil fuels. A fined-down
consideration of threats and policy options is distilled from the huge
report. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/the-un-panel-on-climate-change-challenges-for-progressives/)

H.R. 1000, **a bill initiated by frequent DSA ally Rep. John Conyers**
of Michigan, couples a proposed transactions tax imposed on Wall
Street’s casino with job creation and workforce training that would be
financed by the revenue. DSA has been at the table with other groups
pushing this project, and Andy Feeney reports on the latest angles and
new co-sponsors. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/conyers-jobs-for-all-bill-wins-backing-of-activist-groups-staff-eyes-outreach-to-business/)

The **Maryland General Assembly**’s three-month session, which ended in
early April, provided some real advances (the raised minimum wage
foremost among them) but real disappointments as well (the raised
minimum wage among them, paradoxically). Woody Woodruff provides a brief
roundup of the session. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-legislature-showy-but-hard-on-workers-and-the-poor/)

An organization of scientists with both radical, and deeply
establishment roots flourished in the 1970s and ‘80s. Dan Adkins reports
on a recent historical conference that surveyed the roots and role of
**Science for the People**, which still has feisty remnants right in our
area. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/history-conference-remembers-radical-group-science-for-the-people/)

In this month’s **Good Reads**, heavy coverage of Thomas Piketty’s
*Capital in the 21st Century* is joined by more consideration of climate
change and the challenges it presents to work and to conventional
notions of the primacy of economic growth. And more. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-the-may-day-edition/)

**BOOKS**\
Some books are about today’s and tomorrow’s news. As regulators scramble
to catch up with technology’s effects on the financial markets, Andy
Feeney reviews **Michael Lewis’s *Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revol****t*
which has focused attention on potentially billions in losses to
investors because of microsecond differences in computerized trading.
Public attention sparked by this book could encourage tighter rules for
traders and institutions as threats of another bubble are emerging.
[*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/michael-lewiss-new-expose-of-wall-street-predators-can-it-build-support-for-a-us-financial-transaction-tax-2/)

The increasing consolidation of giant telecommunications corporations
like Comcast and Time Warner Cable — and the few remaining phone
companies — has likewise raised concerns about monopoly pricing for poor
infrastructure and slow service in both TV and the Internet. Add to that
the Federal Communications Commission’s apparent willingness to give
away the store on net neutrality to those same giant oligopolies, and
Susan Crawford’s account of how the regulators came to be captured by
big money in ***Captive Audience: The Telecom Industry and Monopoly
Power in the New Gilded Age*** is also today’s news. Woody Woodruff
reviews the book and its radical insights. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/the-coming-comcast-juggernaut-a-review-essay/)\
In a complementary article, Carolyn Byerly outlines the battleground as
the FCC considers both the proposed Comcast/Time Warner Cable merger and
**new rules for who rules the Net** – and shows where you can make your
voice heard. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/net-neutrality-and-the-ordinary-folks/)

You can receive this newsletter, with links to full articles, in your
email inbox the first of every month. Email woodlanham@gmail.com

[*Conyers ‘Jobs for All’ Bill Wins Backing of Activist Groups, Local
Governments; Staff Eyes Outreach to
Business*](http://dsadc.org/conyers-jobs-for-all-bill-wins-backing-of-activist-groups-staff-eyes-outreach-to-business/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

Significant momentum seems to be growing for HR 1000, the “Jobs for All”
bill introduced this year by longtime DSA ally Rep. John Conyers (D-MI).
There is virtually no chance of this legislation passing so long as the
Republicans keep their House majority, but Conyers, his staff and ‘jobs
for all’ supporters are working to educate different constituencies
around the nation about HR 1000’s provisions for federally funded jobs
creation programs backed up by a small financial transaction tax (FTT).
The strategy is to build public support for “jobs for all legislation”
gradually, although there is no chance of its immediate passage, so as
to improve its political odds of future enactment.

Among progressive groups, there is growing support for the idea of an
FTT, although the idea is currently opposed by the Obama administration
as well as congressional Republicans. Among other groups, the
Congressional Progressive Caucus and the left-leaning National Nurses
United (NNU) have made adoption of an FTT or “Robin Hood tax” a
priority. In April, too, there were a flurry of media articles calling
for such a tax, following publication of Michael Lewis’s new
best-selling book *Flash Boys* (see WS book review, this issue).

A Cornell University professor quoted recently in the *New York Times*
stated that from a public policy perspective, adoption of a national FTT
is “a no-brainer,” and on April 8, the *Times* editorial board stated,
“There are several good \[social justice} arguments for a financial
transactions tax … It would also curb speculation, making the banking
system more stable.”

Whether the response of the liberal-to-progressive media to the Lewis
book will make passage of an FTT feasible this year seems doubtful, but
in the meantime organizing by the Conyers staff for HR 1000 has been
going ahead on its own.

According to Jenny Perrino, who as legislative aide to Conyers has
spearheaded his office’s work on HR 1000, at least 57 members of the
House have now signed on as cosponsors of the bill. As of early April,
the newest cosponsor was Rep. Marcy Kaptur (D-OH), who has now hired
Perrino as her chief of staff, a sign that Kaptur, along with Conyers,
may make the jobs issue a priority in coming months. A new Conyers
staffer, Eric Sperling, will replace Perrino as point person on HR 1000
for Conyers.

Conyers aides have now contacted about 100 different organizations to
drum up support for the jobs bill, Perrino reported at an April 9
meeting attended by 14 individuals in Conyers’ office, as well as others
who participated by teleconferencing.

Participants at the April 9 meeting included representatives of the Gray
Panthers, the national Catholic social justice lobby Network, the
Gamaliel religious fellowship in Texas, and the AFL-CIO central labor
council of Dayton, OH. Also taking part was author D.W. Gibson, of the
Not Working Project in Pittsburgh.

The National Urban League did not have a representative at the meeting,
but the Urban League’s 2014 State of Black America report is titled *One
Nation Unemployed: Jobs Rebuild America.* The report focuses in part on
the crisis of unemployment and underemployment among African Americans
and other communities of color, and features among other things a
commentary by Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake of Baltimore describing
initiatives that Baltimore is taking to drive job creation and reduce
the gap between the city’s haves and have-nots.

Progressive Democrats of America (PDA) is another organization that is
helping to promote HR 1000, Perrino stated at the meeting. Still another
organization that is interested in the issue is the industry-backed
Opportunities Industrial Council (OIC), whose leadership is apparently
reasoning that “business benefits when people are employed,” as Perrino
put it at the meeting.

The recently created House Employment Caucus will play a key role in
promoting HR 1000 going forward, Conyers chief of staff Cynthia Martin
said at the April 9 meeting. Martin added, “We think this bill
transcends politics,” suggesting that it might appeal even to
moderate-to-conservative legislators who are concerned about poor people
becoming excessively dependent on Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) benefits under the TANF or Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families program.

Conyers seems likely to put some effort into reaching out to business
groups in his further efforts to get HR 1000 adopted, judging from what
was said at the April 9 meeting. Conyers himself stated at the meeting
that federally funded job creation efforts should be in the interests of
small businesses, and one of the materials distributed to participants
was a printed version of an [*April 9
*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/john-conyers/paul-ryan-budget_b_5119536.html)blog
op-ed by Conyers that appeared in *The Huffington Post*, stating that
even wealthy Americans should reject the harsh pro-austerity budget
proposed by the GOP’s House Budget Committee chairman Rep. Paul Ryan.

“Here’s a surprise about the Ryan budget: its drastic cuts would be
painful even for the nation’s wealthiest one percent,” the *Huffington
Post* op-ed said. The piece goes on to state:

“Successful CEOs understand that America will never be able to compete
with China and India on the basis of low wages. Rather, our nation needs
to compete on the basis of world-class skills and technical expertise.
To do so, we must ensure access to infant nutrition, universal
pre-school, well-funded public schools with reasonably sized classes,
after-school enrichment programs, and affordable colleges and technical
schools.”

The Conyers op-ed further argues that wealthy American investors have an
interest in rejecting the Ryan budget because Republican-style austerity
would reduce the purchasing power of lower-income Americans, at a time
when a “shortage of consumer demand is stifling economic growth, hurting
housing market recovery, and denying businesses the customers they need
in order to make payroll and turn a profit.”

Thus when the House votes on a budget plan this spring, the editorial
concludes, “the choice is not between serving the rich or the poor. It’s
a choice between investing in broad-based prosperity and continuing a
failed experiment of austerity.”

To the extent that democratic socialists continue to support Conyers in
his efforts to champion the establishment of a national financial
transaction tax to underwrite job creation by state, local and national
government, therefore, it may well be that we end up supporting
legislation that will be sold under pro-capitalist auspices, and in the
supposed self-interest of even the richest “1 percent.”

On the other hand, it is difficult to imagine how Conyers and his staff
might hope to get HR 1000 adopted within the reasonably foreseeable
future by relying only on the weak and divided U.S. left, especially
given the role that big money obviously plays in Washington politics and
given the importance of large campaign donors to both major political
parties.

Comments and printed materials distributed at the April 9 meeting
indicate that Conyers and staff will be taking part in a number of
events over coming months to promote the “jobs for all” agenda. One
event tentatively scheduled for May will be a meeting to facilitate the
collaboration of the business-backed OIC with the House Employment
Caucus.

Conyers’ office also will be collaborating with the Gamaliel “Jobs For
All Campaign” as it seeks to influence the revision of three federal
workforce regulations in the coming months. These provisions relate to
hiring of women and minorities on federal contracts, oversight of
apprenticeship programs in the construction industry and the targeting
of jobs and job training to low-income people under various Department
of Housing and Urban Development programs.

Conyers also was scheduled to visit Dayton and Cincinnati in April to
build support for HR 1000 among Democratic politicians in Ohio and to
visit Pittsburgh in mid-May to promote the legislation in Pennsylvania.
A longer-term goal is to prepare an impressive presentation on the jobs
bill for the annual Congressional Black Caucus Conference that will take
place in the fall.

Metro DC DSA representatives have attended most of the regular meetings
on HR 1000 that Conyers has held over the past year and will continue to
monitor the progress of organizing around the legislation.

[*DC Local weighs in on net neutrality, cable
megamerger*](http://dsadc.org/dc-local-weighs-in-on-net-neutrality-cable-megamerger/)

Tuesday, May 13th, 2014

**METRO DC DSA POSITION STATEMENT**

**ON COMCAST-TWC MERGER AND NET NEUTRALITY RULEMAKING**

**Adopted by the Steering Committee of DC-Metro DSA**

**May 10, 2014**

     Members of the DC-Metro chapter of Democratic Socialists of America
oppose the proposed merger of Comcast and Time Warner Cable (MB Docket
No. 14-57).  The merger, if allowed, would privilege wealthy cable
companies over the interests of a majority of the people in the United
States.  If merged, the new parent company would control 19 of the
largest 20 markets in the nation, something that approximates a
monopoly.  With that kind of economic power, cable customers would see
escalating subscription fees, something that would put access out of
reach for those in low-income families.  Most low-income families are
minorities, a fact that should not be overlooked.  Lack of access to
cable would also affect access to broadband/Internet services, something
that would expand the digital divide between the haves and have-nots. 
Another aspect in the proposed merger often overlooked is the
anticipated layoff of hundreds, perhaps thousands of employees.

We believe this clear worst-case instance of the effects of corporate
consolidation should move the FCC to consider the essential
public-utility quality of cable and internet services and declare these
entities common carriers, governed by the agency’s public-interest
mandate and subject to regulation to ensure net neutrality in its full
meaning

As the decision heads toward a vote, we urge Commissioners to remember
that the Internet was created and developed largely at taxpayer
expense.  We believe that this resource, now privatized for profit,
should remain widely and fairly available to all in the spirit of public
interest.

This statement was passed at the May 10 membership meeting and posted on
the FCC comments section
([*www.fcc.gov/comments*](http://dsadc.org/2014/05/www.fcc.gov/comments))
May 13.

[Good Reads: the May Day
edition](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-the-may-day-edition/)

**Good Reads for Socialists in May**

The Young Democratic Socialists’ Red Letter is out with coverage of
their February conference: <http://www.ydsusa.org/red_letter_s14>

Cities are doing their own thing when it comes to combating inequality –
a problem that is getting no traction at the national level. The *New
York Times*’s take on this focuses on Seattle but has a good chart and
some useful links. It’s a start…

<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/business/economy/cities-advancing-inequality-fight.html?action=click&contentCollection=U.S.&region=Footer&module=MoreInSection&pgtype=article>

*Gris*t, a feisty rad-enviro site, reports on a plan to take the Occupy
spirit and method to small towns and locate the movement sustainably…
[*http://grist.org/politics/an-occupy-founder-says-the-next-revolution-will-be-rural/*](http://grist.org/politics/an-occupy-founder-says-the-next-revolution-will-be-rural/)

Kurt Stand provides Joe Uehlein’s Earth Day meditation on labor and the
environment, from *Portside*
[*https://portside.org/2014-04-21/earth-day-labor-and-me*](https://portside.org/2014-04-21/earth-day-labor-and-me)

PIKETTY’s US TOUR – Thomas Piketty, the economist who wrote the hot new
book *Capital in the 21^st^ Century*, did a US tour in April that
included a local stop at the Economic Policy Institute April 15 – so of
course they talked about taxes, but less than you would think. You can
watch him talk and respond to a panel that included the magisterial and
twinkly Nobel laureate Robert Solow, here
[*http://www.epi.org/event/thomas-piketty-wealth-income-inequality/?utm\_source=Economic+Policy+Institute&utm\_campaign=8f26523855-Piketty\_04\_14\_20144\_14\_2014&utm\_medium=email&utm\_term=0\_e7c5826c50-8f26523855-55958357*](http://www.epi.org/event/thomas-piketty-wealth-income-inequality/?utm_source=Economic+Policy+Institute&utm_campaign=8f26523855-Piketty_04_14_20144_14_2014&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_e7c5826c50-8f26523855-55958357)

The next day Piketty visited the graduate center at City University of
New York. See that event here
[*http://www.thenation.com/article/179195/livestream-thomas-piketty-inequality-inevitable*](http://www.thenation.com/article/179195/livestream-thomas-piketty-inequality-inevitable)

And a writer for The Nation reviewed Piketty’s book along with numerous
other contributions to the inequality debate, in a quite impressive
pocket history essay on the fortunes of Marxism and the term it invented
– capitalism – over the years. Today’s writers, including the *Jacobin*
stable, are not spared, and consideration of Piketty’s weighty work is a
centerpiece. It’s at
[*http://www.thenation.com/article/179337/thomas-piketty-and-millennial-marxists-scourge-inequality*](http://www.thenation.com/article/179337/thomas-piketty-and-millennial-marxists-scourge-inequality)

Still more on Piketty (who has become a celeb, obviously, marked by the
fact that both David Brooks and Paul Krugman had [*columns about
him*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/25/opinion/krugman-the-piketty-panic.html)
on April 25). Here’s a softish take by Matthew Iglesias on Vox, the new
newsnstuff website…
[*http://www.vox.com/2014/4/24/5643780/who-is-thomas-piketty*](http://www.vox.com/2014/4/24/5643780/who-is-thomas-piketty)

Another take on Piketty by our sometime former member Bhaskar Sunkara of
Jacobin, writing in Al Jazeera Online…
[*http://america.aljazeera.com/opinions/2014/4/thomas-piketty-capitalism21stcentury.html*](http://america.aljazeera.com/opinions/2014/4/thomas-piketty-capitalism21stcentury.html)

The US role in the world: A local DSA member who blogs under his
initials discussed (in March) the twin preoccupations (or deformations)
of ‘nation-building’ and modernization in U.S. foreign policy:

[*http://howlatpluto.blogspot.com/2014/03/nation-building-and-modernization-as.html*](http://howlatpluto.blogspot.com/2014/03/nation-building-and-modernization-as.html)

 

The argument that inequality is due to technological change and a
“skills gap” is given a good roughing up in this piece by economist
Colin Gordon in *Dissent* – tx to Ben Krieder for giving this a ride on
Facebook…
[*http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/the-computer-did-it-technology-and-inequality*](http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/the-computer-did-it-technology-and-inequality)

Sam Pizzigatti’s “Too Much” blog (from IPS) focuses on inequality and
wretched excess. Lead this time: the contemptible behavior of the
hyper-nouveaux riches in Palo Alto (Silicon Valley, doncha know) Calif.,
who have criminalized sleeping in cars. Whatever happened to respect for
property? Check it out at
[*http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html*](http://www.toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html)

The proposed merger of two giant cable/telcom companies (Comcast and
Time Warner Cable) is in gestation now, just as the FCC is considering
new rules that some say could endanger the openness of the Internet, and
privilege big-money users like the cable giants. We have a review essay
on Susan Crawford’s new history of this conflict (see main contents) and
here’s a piece from the Atlantic explaining net neutrality that trends
seriously nerdy and has links to even nerdier material. Be warned.
[*http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/04/the-best-writing-on-net-neutrality/361237/*](http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/04/the-best-writing-on-net-neutrality/361237/)

Discussion of climate change is moving steadily from remediation to
mitigation – the news is that bad. Recent posts include a whole package
from *The Nation* for Earth Day, such as this suggestion that this be
the last Earth Day:
[*http://www.thenation.com/blog/179375/let-earth-day-be-last*](http://www.thenation.com/blog/179375/let-earth-day-be-last)

And another big take from Naomi Klein, whose *Nation* article of several
years back changed many readers’ perspectives on what’s possible… now
saying our timing couldn’t be worse: “Climate change is a collective
problem demanding collective action the likes of which humanity has
never actually accomplished. Yet it entered mainstream consciousness in
the midst of an ideological war being waged on the very idea of the
collective sphere.”

[*http://www.thenation.com/article/179460/change-within-obstacles-we-face-are-not-just-external\#*](http://www.thenation.com/article/179460/change-within-obstacles-we-face-are-not-just-external)

From *Grist*, the enviro newsletter, another way to view the politics of
climate change – through the lens of history…
[*http://grist.org/climate-energy/is-climate-change-the-new-slavery/*](http://grist.org/climate-energy/is-climate-change-the-new-slavery/)

And from the Guardian, yet another label, and another look at who
actually is suffering the most from climate change. Not will suffer, is
suffering. The evidence mounts…
[*http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/07/climate-change-violence-occupy-earth*](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/07/climate-change-violence-occupy-earth)

[*Happy International Workers’ Day, the Real “Labor
Day”*](http://dsadc.org/happy-international-workers-day-the-real-labor-day/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2014**

May 1 will mark the 128^th^ anniversary of the first International
Workers’ Day, the date the campaign for the eight-hour workday was
launched in the United States with massive rallies and a general strike.
The infamous Haymarket Square massacre in Chicago, where a bomb killed
seven police officers, occurred at one of these rallies. Eight workers
were convicted, and some historians, including Howard Zinn, have
concluded the bombing was the work of a provocateur who wanted to give
police a pretext to arrest leaders of the protest. International
Workers’ Day is celebrated as the official day of labor in much of the
world – but not in the United States where it began. In 1894 Congress,
with the support of a few centrist labor organizations, established a
“Labor Day” in September for the express purpose of avoiding association
with the more radical and militant groups who championed May 1 as
labor’s holiday. So remember to raise a fist and a red banner this May
Day. *– Bill Mosley*

 

**May Day in Vietnam**

*By David Duhalde*

In the spring of 2005, I was on the extended vacation experienced by
millions of middle-class and wealthier American youth: study abroad. I
studied at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, and even interned at the
*China Labour Bulletin* – an NGO focused on helping mainland workers.
This opportunity also allowed me to travel throughout the region. With a
Canadian friend, I spent two-weeks in Vietnam including Reunification
Day (April 30) and Workers Day (May 1).

 Since the mid-1980s, the Socialist Republic of Vietnam had undergone
Doi Moi; its own form of capitalist restoration like the People’s
Republic of China. Vietnam, however, under my observations, had
significantly less of an open break with Marxism-Leninism and
embracement of consumerism. Unlike in my visits to China, I saw pictures
and statues of Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin. The sections of the country
that I saw abstained from blatant corporate advertising. Driving down a
country road, instead of billboards for consumer goods there was
government propaganda. However, the signs spent less time praising the
glories of state socialism and more on AIDS prevention advocacy.

 The timing of my trip coincided with the 30^th^ anniversary of the fall
of Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh City) on April 30, 1975. Reunification Day
and May Day were always back-to-back, but that year saw even larger
festivities including a visit by future Cuban President Raul Castro.
Castro’s attendance meant the cities were filled with Spanish-language
banners. With my poor Spanish skills, I read one placard: “Cuba and
Vietnam, Together Shall Overcome.” What exactly they were overcoming was
never specified.

 As May Day drew closer, my curiosity was filled with stock footage of
mandatory Soviet May Day parades. I predicted the same still happened in
Vietnam. So I dragged my friend to tourist information desks pleading
for parade details. At one point trying hand gesturing “Cuba” to a
confused civil servant, which my travel mate has never let me forget.
May 1st came without Stalinist marching. Instead, we found most people
enjoying the day off. At night, we looked for dinner and found a
restaurant. It appeared to be open, but actually the staff was cooking
and eating together. Their solidarity with each other embodied the true
spirit of Labor Day in a way no march ever could. Sometimes, the workers
of the world have to relax, too.

[*History conference remembers radical group, Science for the
People*](http://dsadc.org/history-conference-remembers-radical-group-science-for-the-people/)

***The Washington Socialis*t &lt;&gt; May 2014**

*By Daniel Adkins*

Science for the People (SftP) is a leftist group that was mainly active
in the 70s and 80s.  It was the topic of a science history conference at
University of Massachusetts in Amherst this April.  The conference was
supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation.  The
conference was a multi-generational meeting with older SftP types,
professors, and students.

The conference detailed the history of SftP.  One linage was by elite
physicists involved in creating the atomic bomb and other military
research.  Often scientists were hired for non-nuclear research and
later told that their funds were in jeopardy if they could not take on
weapons projects too.  During the Cold War much of physics research was
funded by the U.S. military.  Today the sciences have broader support. 
Sadly some of this funding for mathematicians and physicists is from
Wall Street in efforts to rig the stock market for instantaneous profits
for the 1% while our long–term sustainability is in jeopardy.

The other influence for SftP was politicized progressives and lefties in
the sciences.  There were many SftP chapters including the Helen Keller
(a socialist) collective in Boston which published many copies of the
magazine.  SftP is unique in that it points out how capitalism focuses
on profits for the few and subverts the social use of its products.  An
example is how our farms and food industry are more concerned with
selling and creating needs for their products (creating addiction to
sugar), then to meeting the need for healthy food products.  The food
industry also cognitively captures the U. S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) to meet the needs of industry which is why some progressive food
experts press for the need to move the definition of the national diet
from USDA to the Center for Disease Control (CDC) which has a health
focus.

The original SftP group had a reputation of breaking up regular American
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) meetings to get their
members’ voices heard.  This may seem crass, but often these meetings
were run by defense scientists who were intent on not having their
research questioned.  In one meeting a defense scientist who was being
considered to lead the AAAS, was loudly accused by SftP of crimes of
science against the people.  The SftP speaker had surrounded himself
with activists to avoid being interrupted by the police.  This event hit
the newspapers.

Today the Department of Defense is still a major employer of scientists,
but is not the only major actor.  Some corporations try to invent the
future making us even more connected, but many just use science as a way
to make profits.  Capitalism has significantly captured our legislative
and the executive branches to feed profits to the businesses as opposed
to moving us to a sustainable and healthy future.

Washington is lucky to have the last SftP chapter and this bonus is
mainly due to progressive professors and students at Howard University. 
Some of the issues they focus on are:\
\* climate change\
\* the militarization of science\
\* agricultural science and food justice\
\* the scientific construction of race and gender

For information on Science for the People check out:\
Science for the People Conference :  
 [*http://science-for-the-people.org*](http://science-for-the-people.org)\
DC Metro Science for the People: 
[*http://www.dcmetrosftp.org*](http://www.dcmetrosftp.org)\
SftP magazines can be found at:
[*http://socrates.berkeley.edu/\~schwrtz/SftP/MagazineArchive/MagTOCs.html*](http://socrates.berkeley.edu/%7Eschwrtz/SftP/MagazineArchive/MagTOCs.html)

[Maryland Legislature: Showy, but hard on workers and the
poor](http://dsadc.org/maryland-legislature-showy-but-hard-on-workers-and-the-poor/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

A pretty uneventful, rancor-free budget process and the ballyhoo over
passage of a minimum wage increase and decriminalization of marijuana in
the Maryland General Assembly’s 2014 session masked some major
disappointments for progressive ideas and forces when the session ended
in early April.

The vaunted minimum wage bill was a priority of Gov. Martin O’Malley.
But his proposal was gutted by House committee action by the time it
emerged, extending the phase-in period to reach a level of \$10.10 per
hour to 2018, two years more than originally formulated. Tipped workers
were left in the trough they are in now, with a proportional attempt to
raise their wages stripped out in the House bill. And a measure to allow
the wage to rise further with inflation after 2018 was removed.

But at least the minimum wage bill passed. The Earned Sick and Safe
Leave Act that would have allowed 700,000 uncovered Maryland workers to
earn paid sick leave failed for the second year in the Economic Matters
Committee of the House, [one of many
casualties](http://dsadc.org/an-update-on-marylands-legislature/) of the
persistent pro-business, anti-worker bias carefully built into the
committee systems of both chambers. Significant numbers of food service
workers, for instance, will need to go to work sick in order not to be
fired.

A “Maryland Second Chance Act” (HB1166) that would have enabled
ex-offenders to clear their records for the purpose of seeking
employment three years after release failed because House and Senate
couldn’t agree on their respective amendments, though it was passed by
both chambers.

As noted in a previous *Washington Socialist* article, a bill supported
by labor leaders and peace activists providing for a Maryland Futures
Commission that would have planned a post-Pentagon path for the state’s
workforce was [sideswiped by the
leadership](http://dsadc.org/maryland-legislative-roundup-mike-mike-kill-a-bill/),
which pre-empted it with a study committee of safe centrists appointed
by Senate President Mike Miller and House Speaker Mike Busch.

A “Democracy Amendment” that would have committed the state to an
“Article V” constitutional convention of the states with the express
purpose of reversing the Citizens United Supreme Court decision came
close to passage by the Senate as the Assembly’s last night of work
April 7 descended to its normal chaos. A dispatch from the activist
group [Get Money Out – Maryland](http://www.getmoneyoutmd.org/) reported
that Senate President Mike Miller was forced to quash the passage by
invoking the specter of a “runaway convention” with bad consequences. So
“now we know where our main barrier lies” for a success in 2015, the
group asserted.

The Assembly rushed to placate business interests and the wealthy by
raising the exclusion on the state’s estate tax to the federal level.
Now an estate must be well over \$5 million to be subject to the estate
tax, where before estates of \$1 million or more fell under the tax.
 That would allow more large estates to escape paying a fair share and
staunch a “millionaire drain” apparently perceived by alarmists on the
business right – who always have an ear in the Assembly. According to
the narrative, the really rich are relocating official residences in
other, better states to die. The Assembly’s chief financial policy
analyst predicted a revenue loss of \$80-90 million a year. Suggestions
that a better tax relief move would be to cut the regressive sales tax
or increase the Earned Income Tax Credit, [noted in the *Baltimore
Sun*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/bs-bz-estate-tax-20140130,0,5064698.story?page=1),
did not find takers in the Assembly.

So, for many progressive causes and bills, it is “wait till next year.”
For the Assembly, it was business as usual.

[Michael Lewis’s New Expose of Wall Street Predators: Can It Build
Support for a US Financial Transaction
Tax?](http://dsadc.org/michael-lewiss-new-expose-of-wall-street-predators-can-it-build-support-for-a-us-financial-transaction-tax-2/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

Book Review of *Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt*, by Michael Lewis.
W.H. Norton and Company: New York and London (2014). 274 pages,
hardcover; \$27.95.

 There are two good reasons DSA members may want to read this new
financial expose by best-selling author Michael Lewis. The first is that
it’s an enjoyable read – a journalistic expose of some very convoluted
double-dealing in the securities market that reads surprisingly like a
good mystery novel. The second reason is that in the roughly four weeks
that have passed since its March 31 publication, *Flash Boys* has become
politically important.

A flurry of media coverage has relayed to millions of Americans Lewis’s
conclusion that a small circle of high-tech “High Frequency Trading”
(HFT) firms has found ways to siphon off hundreds of billions of dollars
from U.S. financial markets, and that HFT traders are now gouging more
traditional investors ranging from union pension funds to big hedge
funds while creating dangerous market instability in the process.

Lewis has been interviewed on *60 Minutes*, for example; certain critics
of his conclusions and their applicability to small investors have
nonetheless thanked him for drawing attention to the risks of HFT
traders potentially destabilizing the securities markets; and a reporter
in *BloombergNe*ws/*Businessweek* recently noted that a survey of
financial industry participants showed that 51 percent now think of HFT
trading as a “serious” or “very serious” problem.

Perhaps coincidentally, new investigations of HFT trading have recently
been announced by the FBI and the New York Attorney General’s Office.
And progressives who have long wanted to curb the excessive growth of
U.S. financial markets by enacting a national Financial Transaction Tax
(FTT), otherwise known as a “Tobin Tax” or “Robin Hood Tax,” have seized
on *Flash Boys* as evidence that the United States needs a “flash tax”
to tackle exactly the sort of predatory trading Lewis describes.

Washington D.C.’s *The Hill* recently quoted Rep. Peter DeFazio (D-OR)
and Rep. Keith Ellison (D-MN), for example, on an FTT’s potential
ability to cure some of the problems Lewis portrays. Articles and
editorials linking *Flash Boys* and proposals for an FTT also have
appeared in *Salon,* the *Guardian,* the AFL-CIO’s blog, the *Huffington
Post*, the *Christian Science Monitor* and the *New York Times*,
although some observers caution that there are still strong headwinds
against such a tax, from both Republicans and the Obama White House.

Socialists who support a national FTT therefore may want to give *Flash
Boys* a glance, if only to find political ammunition. But a second
excellent reason for picking up the book is that Lewis is a talented
writer, with an almost novelistic sense of plot and character
development, and in *Flash Boys* as in several previous exposes he
succeeds in making technical explanations of obscure financial scams
surprisingly pleasurable to read – pleasurable, and often very funny.

In *Flash Boys’* introduction*,* Lewis writes that his idea for the book
began when he read of a rather unworldly Russian-born computer
programmer, one Sergei Aleynikov, being arrested by the FBI for
allegedly stealing from Goldman Sachs, his former employer, a rather
small amount of computer code. According to prosecutors, this code, if
placed in the wrong hands, could be used to “manipulate the market in
unfair ways.”

Well, Lewis recalls wondering, if it was dangerous to the markets in the
“wrong” hands, how safe would it be if it remained with Goldman Sachs?

With this, Lewis introduces the reader to a brave new world of HFT
trading firms that has taken off rapidly in just the last few years.
About half of *Flash Boys* describes the ways in which some very smart
start-up HFT firms as well as several major investment banks (the banks,
however, proving much less adept at HFT than their nimbler small rivals)
have discovered how to game an increasingly computerized U.S. securities
business for their own enrichment.

In the process of perfecting HFT trading, Lewis concludes, the “flash
boys” have quietly skimmed off hundreds of billions of dollars – no one
knows exactly how much – from traditional institutional investors. The
investors victimized, for example, have included large hedge funds,
traditional union pension funds and such commercial money managers as T.
Rowe Price, Charles Schwab and Janus Capital.

The book’s second half, more or less, offers Lewis’s account of how a
peculiar collection of financial industry misfits gradually puzzled out
the ways in which the HFT world was being gamed. We then learn how these
reformers have apparently invented an effective strategy – effective for
now, anyway — to shield more traditional investors from the predators.
But whether the fix for investors is extensive enough to shield
securities markets from the larger, potentially destabilizing activities
of HFT traders is a question now worrying some financial analysts, and
Lewis’s gnomic last chapter expresses quiet skepticism over whether any
fix can be final in an ever-evolving financial world where rampant greed
intersects routinely with high technology.

Central to Lewis’s story is an account of how apparently
well-intentioned financial regulations have combined with advanced
computer technology and high-speed fiber optics to transform U.S. stock
markets since 1987. It was in 1987 that an unexpected glitch in the New
York Stock Exchange caused a sudden, one-day drop of roughly 33 percent
in the average values of securities traded, although the financial
markets then recovered almost instantly afterwards.

Because of the misbehavior of certain individual brokers during in the
1987 mini-crash – some simply stopped taking phone calls, leaving
terrified clients unable to respond to the news – U.S. financial
regulators passed new rules requiring most securities trading in the
future to be done automatically, via computer.

Thus while many Americans still think of the stock market as occurring
in the New York Stock Exchange building on Wall Street, Lewis notes that
today’s trading is mostly done without face-to-face human interaction,
by computer, over 13 separate electronic exchanges located on big
servers in northern New Jersey. A separate computerized exchange
services the futures market in Chicago, which is an important but
ancillary story to the main tale Lewis tells.

Over the years since 1987, Lewis notes, a series of added regulations,
culminating in a 2005 rule called Regulation National Market System or
“Reg NMS,” have attempted to keep computerized investment firms from
cheating their own customers by requiring the traders to seek out the
very best market prices for any given customer in any given buy or sell
transaction.

Unfortunately, the ironic result of Reg NMS, combined with high-speed
computers and the fragmentation of the securities market into separate
markets, is that today, trading firms that can conduct their business
just a few microseconds faster than other investors can now prey on
their more traditional rivals, especially the bigger ones, through
“front running.”

Thanks to Reg NMS, a large traditional investor like a pension fund or
an investment bank, when it buys or sells a large block of stock – say,
one involving hundreds of thousands of shares – legally must first
survey the 13 different exchanges to find which offers the very best
price.

However, the differing speeds of the computer algorithms in different
trading firms, plus seemingly trivial differences in the efficiency and
lengths of the fiber optic cables carrying orders to the different New
Jersey exchanges, inevitably ensures that trading orders arrive at
different exchanges at very slightly different times.

A smart, predatory high-speed trader with faster processing times than
everyone else thus can determine, from monitoring the fastest exchange
in the system, just what stock a big traditional investor is hoping to
trade at a given time of day, and at what price range. The HFT predator
then offers to buy or sell the security in question at a slightly higher
or lower price than that originally offered by the market, and trades it
nanoseconds later with the traditional investor – at a tiny profit per
share for the HFT trader, and a tiny loss per share for the traditional
investor. Yet those tiny profits and losses per share amount to billions
of dollars in revenues over time, due to the enormous volume of
transactions happening annually.

As Lewis puts it, the net effect of the new world that Reg NMS, the
fiber optics revolution and HFT traders have together created is to
guarantee that since 2007, about 70 percent of all securities
transactions in the United States have recently taken place through the
functional equivalent of an imaginary intermediary firm, one that we
could call “Scalpers, Inc.”

“Scalpers, Inc.,” as Lewis portrays it, interposes itself between
potential buyers and sellers in each trade, forcing both to accept
slightly worse prices than they might otherwise enjoy by trading
directly. By placing itself between buyers and sellers, Scalpers, Inc.
also multiplies the number of trades occurring in securities markets –
according to industry statistics, more than 50 percent of all
transactions in these markets have recently been conducted by HFT firms.
Moreover, the HFT traders inside Scalpers, Inc. have powerful incentives
both for fragmenting securities markets into more and more sub-markets,
and for working to create more volatility – more price swings – in
markets, since it’s largely by exploiting price swings and market
fragmentation that the HFT firms make money.

Partly to protect themselves against HFT traders, Lewis notes,
traditional investment banks have found regulatory loopholes allowing
them to do much of their trading in so-called “dark pools” within their
own institutions. Recently, about 30 percent of securities transactions
in the U.S. have occurred inside these dark pools, where transactions
are opaque to the outside world – and in theory to HFT traders, but also
to financial regulators and the banks’ clients. Unfortunately, there is
no guarantee that a bank will not exploit customers in its dark pool for
its own gain, nor that it will never sell access to its pool to HFT
predators, if they offer enough money. The dark pools thus offer little
protection to investors against being scalped.

The hopelessly nerdy Sergei Aleynikov, Lewis concludes, was considered
dangerous by Goldman Sachs because he had spent two years inside the
firm devising programs to speed up Goldman’s outdated computer system,
basically so Goldman could increase its trading speeds compared to its
smaller HFT rivals. Essentially, Aleynikov had helped Goldman in an
attempt to become a HFT trading firm itself – although in the long run,
Lewis believes, Goldman’s management has deemed this impossible, and has
apparently left the business.

As Lewis portrays him, Aleynikov was truly fascinated by the programming
challenge involved in speeding up Goldman’s trading system and amazingly
uninterested in what his employer might do with it. The whole business
of trading securities for profit was just a form of gambling, Aleynikov
apparently thought, and not worth serious attention. But writing good
computer code was fun, creative, and even potentially good for the
world, so Aleynikov focused on it while observing the mere money-making
activities of his Goldman colleagues with bemusement.

When he was convicted and briefly imprisoned for his alleged theft of
code that he himself had created from open-source software found on the
Internet, Aleynikov was an odd enough character to consider his time in
jail a valuable experience, although he was willing enough to leave the
place once his conviction was thrown out on appeal.

*Lewis’s* description of Aleynikov’s idealistic personality and his
genial alienation from the competitive, financially driven characters
around him offers one of several novelistic pleasures to be found in
*Flash Boys*, one even readers with little grasp of Wall Street can
appreciate.

There are many other quirky personalities explored in in *Flash Boys* as
well. In this book, just as he did in *The Big Short*, a funny yet
horrifying look at the financial follies preceding the 2007-2008 crash
in the securitized mortgages market, Lewis structures his exploration of
a complex financial reality by examining it through the shifting
viewpoints of succeeding major and minor characters, each with a
peculiar — and hence interesting – personality and background.

What could have been a dry lecture about basically incomprehensible
flows of money and technology thus acquires a human face, indeed a
series of them, and readers are likely to come away from Lewis’s mosaic
portrait of HFT trading with affection for many of the characters
portrayed, possibly including some of the villains.

At the end of *Flash Boys*, an eccentric posse of reformers led by Brad
Katsuyama, a former trader with the Royal Bank of Canada, has apparently
invented a new way of doing securities trading that can block the HFT
predators and free traditional investors from their baleful power. No
less a Wall Street icon than Goldman Sachs itself appears to be backing
the reformers’ invention, which is also embraced by many other big names
on Wall Street, including some hedge funds that have rarely been accused
of financial altruism in the past. Thus *Flash Boys*, unlike some other
Lewis exposes, ends with the good guys winning – again, for now.

From a Marxist and a socialist perspective, there is a certain amount of
pure nonsense to be found in *Flash Boys,* which may be why many
mainstream media like it. For example, Lewis at one point suggests that
“front ending” by high-frequency traders, by skimming off billions in
profits from the securities business, has the bad effect of reducing the
flow of investors’ dollars into productive investments in the real
economy.

As leftist financial writer Doug Henwood wrote in *Wall Street* (1987)
and as other financial analysts also point out, this is at best
debatable. Except for investments in Initial Public Offerings (IPOs),
most trading of stocks and bonds in our economy is merely secondary
trade in already-issued securities. It does nothing directly to place
capital in productive, real-world enterprises that can use the money to
employ workers and use up natural resources while producing actual
commodities. Instead, trading in the secondary markets mostly makes
different traders richer or poorer.

Admittedly, improved stock prices can make it easier for a popular
company to borrow capital for expansion, which does affect the real
world, and swings in prices can be a big factor in the long-term health
of a union pension fund or commercial investment firm handling middle
class 401-K accounts. But the money the HFT traders have been taking
from large hedge fund managers, say, is probably not being diverted from
the Main Street economy very much.

In an early passage of the book, Lewis also paraphrases Katsuyama to the
effect that “the U.S. Stock market was now a class system, rooted in
speed, of haves and have-nots.” That seems reasonable in light of
Lewis’s general theme, but he then adds: “What had once been the world’s
most public, most democratic, financial market had become, in spirit,
something more like a private viewing of a stolen work of art.” Given
what Lewis himself has written about Wall Street in earlier books,
calling it “the world’s most public, most democratic financial market”
is just silly. And Lewis himself seems to contradict this statement soon
afterward in his saga.

Elsewhere in *Flash Boys,* Lewis offers some sharp, disturbing insights
about the disruptive effects of new technology, not only on older
Americans and poor children on the wrong side of the digital divide, but
even on some of capitalism’s elites.

Thus one of the more profane members of Katsuyama’s reform team, an
Irish-born technology manager named Ronan who bristles at being
condescended to by arrogant traders who make fortunes by relying on his
work, says of his former colleagues: “I realized very quickly, and
they’ll admit this, so I mean no disrespect, that they had no fucking
clue what they were doing.”

What was true of most securities traders in 2010, Lewis writes, also was
true of most officials at the Securities and Exchange Commission when
first informed about HFT. To quote Lewis, when HFT trading was becoming
common, “stock market regulators did not possess the information they
needed to understand the stock markets.” Similarly clueless about HFT
trading were high-level executives at some 500 major investment firms,
overseeing the investing of trillions of dolllars, whom Katsuyama’s team
had contacted by the end of 2010.

In a sense, *Flash Boys* illustrates a phrase popularized by
Nobel-prize-winning liberal economist Joseph Stiglitz, whose main
professional contribution has been to explain how free markets are
regularly distorted by “asymmetric information.” Clearly, rapid
technological change in computers and fiber optics has produced a new
problem of “asymmetric information” in the securities markets, and the
HFT predators can scalp older, slower, more traditional traders by
exploiting it.

An older phrase familiar to Marx, and before him to the great capitalist
economist Adam Smith, further suggests that Stiglitz’s problem of
“asymmetric information” is automatically being generated today by
Smith’s famous “division of labor in society.” Arguably, the division of
labor and specialized skills that make capitalism technologically great
also have generated a world in which brilliant but narrowly focused
computer technologists, fiber optics designers and Wall Street traders
simply don’t understand each other. In this world, even billionaire
hedge fund managers can be flummoxed by what futurist writer Alvin
Toffler, a former Marxist, has christened “Future Shock.” Many of the
rest of us are even more defenseless.

Lewis writes a good deal about future shock in *Flash Boys,* often
without seeming to, and also offers deft but stinging insights into
other features of today’s financial markets. Whether the barbs hidden in
Lewis’s brisk prose and fascinating character studies will trigger any
meaningful reforms is undoubtedly too soon to tell.

[*Net Neutrality and the Ordinary
Folks*](http://dsadc.org/net-neutrality-and-the-ordinary-folks/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2014**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

All the progressive players are now proclaiming the “death of the
Internet” and “the end of net neutrality”
([*http://truth-out.org/news/item/23300-is-the-fcc-poised-to-destroy-net-neutrality*](http://truth-out.org/news/item/23300-is-the-fcc-poised-to-destroy-net-neutrality)).
Even the Gray Lady, the *New York Times*
([*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/24/technology/fcc-new-net-neutrality-rules.html?\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/24/technology/fcc-new-net-neutrality-rules.html?_r=0)),
ran a leading front-page story in late April questioning whether FCC
Chairman Tom Wheeler’s public statements favoring higher pricing to some
customers (like Netflix) by Internet Service Providers (ISPs) like AT&T
and Verizon would be the death knell for net neutrality.

This “fast lane” policy would allow the wealthier ISPs to pass the cost
along to customers. Those who can pay the most, get the faster service.
Also not to be missed in this controversy is that smaller ISPs, which
provide Internet access to millions of community based organizations and
ordinary people, would be reduced to the “slow lanes,” i.e., slower
service. Those less well-heeled customers who now subscribe to one of
the uber-corporations (as media critic and scholar Bob McChesney calls
them) could find it hard to pay higher fees. DSA’s national office,
individual DSA members, and other ordinary folks could be affected.

This (less competition, more control over the Internet), is course, is
what the few big ubers want. A fast-lane policy would squeeze the
smaller players out of the market by enticing their customers (who can
afford higher monthly fees) to go with the more expensive options
offered through Verizon, AT&T or Comcast.

The Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
([*www.fcc.gov*](http://www.fcc.gov)) has tilted increasingly toward
corporate interests since the 1980s under Ronald Reagan. Neoliberal
pro-market philosophies that guided communications policies under both
Republican and Democrat presidents and Congress since then, have given
us a highly concentrated media industry in the USA. It was telecom
industry lawyers in the mid-1990s who wrote the Telecommunications Act
of 1996, the stealth legislation that was passed by both houses of
Congress and sent President Clinton for signature without any publicity
or a single public hearing. That legislation, which deregulated the
telecommunications industry, has been the Bible of neoliberal policy
making by the FCC in the years since.

The Times quoted Todd O’Boyle of Common Cause’s Media and Democracy
Reform Initiative saying, “If it goes forward, this capitulation will
represent Washington at its worst.”  He also raised one of the hidden
effects of such a policy, observing, “Americans were promised, and
deserve, an Internet that is free of toll roads, fast lanes and
censorship — corporate or governmental.”  O’Boyle referred to such a
policy as one of “betrayal” to Americans, something that fairly condemns
the behavior of an agency that exists to assure that media systems
operate “in the public interest, necessity and convenience,” according
to law.

The FCC has yet not acted on the matter of “fast lane” policy for
Internet companies, so the public can still get a word in to oppose it.
And, flooding the FCC with even short statements from individuals and
groups just might have an effect, something seen recently when a flood
of opposition to the proposed Comcast-Time Warner Cable merger
apparently turned the tide of proposed FCC policymaking.

At this writing, the FCC had received 506 comments on net neutrality,
most of them a single short statement. To read these statements and/or
to file your own, go to the Commission’s domain for comments:
[*http://www.fcc.gov/comments*](http://www.fcc.gov/comments).

[*Poetry in Motion/Poetry as Resistance: Split this Rock
Festival*](http://dsadc.org/poetry-in-motionpoetry-as-resistance-split-this-rock-festival/)

** *The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2014**

*By Kurt Stand*

**I**

What is Freedom? – ye can tell

That which slavery is too well –

For its very name has grown

To an echo of your own.

’Tis to work and have such pay

As just keeps life from day to day

In your limbs as in a cell

For the tyrants’ use to dwell,

So that ye for them are made

Loom, and plough, and sword, and spade,

With or without your own will bent

To their defence and nourishment.

‘Tis to see your children weak

With their mothers pine and peak,

When the winter winds are bleak: —

They are dying whilst I speak

‘Tis to hunger for such diet

As the rich man in his riot

Casts to the fat dogs that lie

Surfeiting beneath his eye.

‘Tis to be a slave in soul,

And to hold no strong control

Over your own wills, but be

All that others make of ye.

And at length when ye complain

With a murmur weak and vain

‘Tis to see the Tyrant’s crew

Ride over your wives and you –

Blood is on the grass like dew.

**II**

These stanzas, written by Shelley in 1819 after English workers were
massacred by soldiers in Manchester, were read aloud by Pauline Newman
in 1911, at a memorial meeting for the 146 workers killed in Triangle
Fire – killed because they unable to escape the New York sweatshop as
the doors were locked (to keep union organizers out). Newman, a Russian
Jewish immigrant, herself had recently worked at that very factory.
Without formal education, she taught herself to read and then taught
others, joined the Socialist Party, became an advocate for women’s
rights, and an organizer for the International Ladies Garment Workers
Union. A century earlier, Shelley, his wife Mary Shelley, and their
friend Lord Byron, following on the influence of (Mary’s parents)
radicals William Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft – author of the
*Vindication of the Rights of Women* – acted on a revolutionary
definition of democracy that celebrated the French revolution, embraced
fighters for Irish freedom, feminism, workers rights. They sought a way
of living that combined personal independence, commitment to social
justice, and an unending search for beauty and meaning in daily life.
Those same goals Newman, her fellow workers, her fellow comrades, sought
in a struggle that embraced hope even when all seemed hopeless.

Michael Demson and Summer McClinton wrote and drew *Masks of Anarchy*, a
graphic novel that interweaves the story of Shelley and Newman. The book
tells of a poem written in response to violence and poverty in a society
ruled by greed and read nearly a hundred years later as an outcry
against the continuing brutalities inherent in a another society ruled
by the power of greed. Poetry as an expression of love of life and a cry
against oppression has as much meaning in this century, as in centuries
gone by.

**III**

Proof of that statement was in evidence March 27-30, for the spirit that
moved Shelley, Newman and others was visible, audible, during Washington
DC’s fourth bi-annual Split This Rock Poetry Festival. Born in 2008,
when Poets Against the War marked the anniversary of the US invasion of
Iraq with public readings of “Provocation and Witness” which brought
together voices demanding an end to the violence and oppression that
mark so much of our country’s policies abroad, our practices within.
This year’s event drew over 600 people to workshops and public readings
that sought to continue dialogue and engagement – engagement including a
“group poem of protest” in front of the White House denouncing
government spying and surveillance.

Split this Rock’s call for repeal of the PATRIOT act and the 2008
amendments to FISA that have permitted unfettered government abuse of
civil liberties reflects the festival’s values. Government intrusion
into private lives, government infiltration into organizations engaging
in public protest, contributes to a state of fear that induces silence.
It is that silence which builds walls between segments of society, that
undermines empathy and personal freedom, that allows social injustice
and oppressive interpersonal relations to exist unchallenged. And it is
that silence which poetry, poetry of engagement and imagination
challenges. In the words of the late Adrienne Rich (amongst those
writers honored during the festival) “Poetry is always being created
anew, in new places by unforetold hands and voices. In this it is like
the many movements against demoralizing power. We don’t know where
either will come from. This is a story without an end.”

**IV**

At the heart of the festival were over 50 workshops, which engaged in
discussions of activism, of gender, of race, of history, of
understanding space and movement; poetry serving as a medium of
expression and as a means to communicate across borders that powerful,
if often invisible, walls normally make unbreakable. Telling of the
achievement behind that is that panelists and participants in those
workshops brought together urban youth from DC’s high schools whose
writings challenge conditions of life too often taken for granted, with
academic poets working in university settings who often speak to the
discomfort that lies behind the lives of those who appear comfortable.
Poets from rural settings, from immigrant backgrounds, of different ages
and different belief systems, combined to produce a mosaic of people far
richer than many cultural – or political – events are generally able to
attract.

Workshop titles give a measure of the richness of the program: “How
Political Engagement Affects the Writing Process,” “Women Write
Resistance: Poets Resist Gender Violence,” ”Gathering Forces: A Living
Anthology of Black LGBTQ Poetry,” “Voices from the Latino Heartland: A
Reading of Identity & Displacement by the Latino Writers Collective,”
Poetic Strategies for Change,” “March to Equality: How Poetry Can
Connect Youth to History,” “Poetry and the New Black Masculinity,” – and
many more. Listing these only touches upon the range of topics discussed
for key to them all was encouraging those sitting and listening to not
just take-in, but to speak and give back. They provided a change to
think through what Tim Seibles suggested when he wrote:

Among *the brothaz*, a certain

grip in the eyes. A sense

of something

Swallowed not chewed –

as if they’d been made

a story and were dying

to untell themselves:\
profiles – prisons,

the sports inside The Sport.

Outside, the wolf

With a

huff and a puff.

–/–

Culture: a kind of knife:

cuts one way opens

your brain to a certain

breed of light shaves

consciousness to its

 purpose, its cross: the nail

thru your hand &gt;&lt; your

other hand holding

the hammer.

**V**

As those lines should indicate, if the workshops were the heart of the
festival, the readings were the soul. Seibles was amongst those who gave
readings, so too was Dunya Mikhail — the following stanzas (19-24) of
this Arab-American poet of today relating a reality that one can imagine
Pauline Newman of old understanding:

\*\*\*

Far away from home –

that’s all that changed in us.

\*\*\*

Cinderella left her slipper in Iraq

along with the smell of cardamom

wafting from the teapot,

and that huge flower,

Its mouth gaping like death.

\*\*\*

Instant messages

ignite revolutions.

They spark new lives

waiting for a country to download,

a land that’s little more

than a handful of dust

when faced with these words:

“There are no results that match your search.”

\*\*\*

The dog’s excitement

as she brings the stick to her owner

is the moment of opening the letter.

\*\*\*

We cross borders lightly

like clouds.

Nothing carriers us,

but as we move on

we carry rain

and an accent

and a memory

of another place.

\*\*\*

How thrilling to appear in his eyes.

She can’t understand what he’s saying:

she’s too busy chewing his voice.

She looks at the mouth she’ll never kiss,

at the shoulder she’ll never cry on,

at the hand she’ll never hold,

and at the ground where their shadows meet.

Altogether, five free poetry readings were presented during Split this
Rock, each at the National Geographic auditorium, in addition to two
later night open mic sessions as Busboys and Poets. Each began with a
recording of a poet who had passed away in the preceding year followed
by a DC Youth Slam Team member reading from his or her own work. After
that three or four published poets, of different backgrounds and styles,
would read – some deeply emotional, analytical, challenging, in
Shelley’s sense, heart and brain.

Too often formal writing separates the search for self and for
individual meaning, separates out incisive observations on the everyday,
from any thought of the social context in which those observations are
made – as though personal heartbreak or joy, as though intimate
observation, can somehow have meaning when abstracted from the world of
work, pain, hatred, war in which our individual lives take place. And,
one can add, too often activists, engaged in struggles for peace and
justice, neglect to take the time to reflect back on the intimate and
the introspective; pretending that these are unconnected with a life of
engagement. To the contrary, political action and cultural awareness
ought to be critical and self-critical, touching on what is directly in
front of our eyes as well as on what is known even when not seen.

True empathy and solidarity cannot take place without self-knowledge,
just as self-knowledge is emptied on content is conceived as taking
place in isolation from the lives of others. The readings, as the
workshops, made those two as one, the poetry of speech, alternately
angry and loving, emotional and thoughtful, opened a window on the
poetry of life. Another of the poets reading during the festival, Joy
Harjo, expressed that sentiment:

I don’t know exactly where I’m going; I only know where I’ve been,

I want to tell the man who sifted through the wreck to find us here

In the blues shack of disappeared history –

I feel the weight of his heart against my cheek.

His hand is on my back pulling me to him in the dark, to a place

No soldiers can reach.

I hear the whoop-cries of warriors calling fire for a stand

Against the brutality of forgetfulness —

Everybody has a heartache –

We will all find our way, no matter fire leaping through holes in

Jump time,

No matter earthquake, or the breaking of love spilling over the

dreck of matter

In the ether, stacking one burden

Against the other –

We have a heartache.

**VI**

It is that recognition that returns us to Pauline Newman’s story, for
she found herself ground down by a life of poverty, by a world of
anti-Semitism, by the mistreatment of women who were treated as below
men not only by society at large, but also within the Jewish community,
in the trade union and socialist movement – a status she, and others,
challenged. Her first activism was, while still a teenager working in
the garment trade, organizing a rent strike amongst the other slum
dwellers. That fight gave her the courage to seek an education within
the male-dominated workers’ reading library she discovered in New York.
Each step was a part and parcel of breaking through to a wider world,
opening up doors that had been closed.

It is that struggle to open up doors, not just to a few, but to all,
which connects her activism with the struggles of today. The rate of
illiteracy is growing in the United States, a growth particularly high
here in Metropolitan Washington DC – a fact that should be shameful,
though apparently many of those dictating public policy are beyond
shame. And so too, rates of inequality, of poverty amidst plenty, of
hunger, of ill-paid work or of no work, are all growing in our nation’s
capital and beyond. It is little wonder that in such circumstances,
violence grows. Realities such as these make freedom something
ever-harder to find in life. After defining slavery, Shelley goes on to
describe the freedom he means – it is a freedom he describes to which we
still aspire, for which we still need to struggle:

What art thou, Freedom? O! could slaves

Answer from their living graves

This demand – tyrants would flee

Like a dream’s imagery. …

For the Laborer thou art bread

And a comely table spread

From his daily labour come

In a neat and happy home.

Thou art clothes, and fire, and food

For the trampled multitude …

Thou art Justice –ne’er for gold

May they righteous laws be sold …

Thou art Wisdom – Freeman never

Dream that God will damn forever

All who think those things untrue

Of which Priests make such ado.

Thou art Peace – never by thee

Would blood and treasure wasted be

As tyrants wasted them, when all

Leagues to quench thy flame in Gaul.

Science, Poetry and Thought

Are thy lamps; they make the lot

Of the dwellers in a cot

So serene, they curse it not.

Spirit, Patience, Gentleness,

All that can adorn and bless

Art thou – let deeds, not words, express

Thine exceeding loveliness

**VII**

Split this Rock’s name comes from a Langston Hughes poem – Hughes’
poetry and prose, his political activism, all expressing an opposition
to racism and injustice by calling upon the our country to live up to
its proclaimed ideals. poetry and political activism. The anger of
Hughes’ poems is built on a recognition of a promise broken and of hope
of renewal. Poetry – just as social justice activism – is premised on
our ability to communicate, on people interacting, listening, learning,
and thereby acting. No organizing is possible otherwise – in fact, the
mutual support and solidarity inherent in the vision of socialist
activism is premised on such an understanding.

Yet our continuing inability to realize our promise as a society is the
reason why poems of old speak so forcefully to the present. In the late
Amiri Baraka’s words (also honored during the festival), “It cannot
come/except you make it/from materials/it is not caught from,” – that
is, we look from the outside of the world we are within. To return to
Hughes, remembered as a name more often than read,

Out of the rack and ruin of our gangster death,

The rape and rot of graft and stealth and lies,

We, the people must redeem

The land, the mines, the plants, the rivers,

The mountains and the endless plan –

And, all the stretch of these great green states –

And make America again!

How can that be done? One imagines the faces of those mourning the dead
listening to Shelley’s call expressing a truth as true today as then:

Let a great Assembly be

Of the fearless and the free …

From the corners uttermost

Of the bounds of English coast;

From every hut, village, and town

Where those who live and suffer moan,

From the workhouse and the prison

Where pale as corpses newly risen,

Women, children, young and old,

Groan for pain, and weep for cold –

From the haunts of daily life

Where is waged the daily strife

With common wants and common cares

Which sows the human heart with tares –

Lastly from the palaces

Where the murmur of distress

Echoes like the distant sound

Of a wind alive around

 Those prison halls of wealth and fashion,

Where some few feel compassion

For those who groan, and toil, and wail

As must make their brethren pale –

Ye who suffer woes untold,

Or to feel, or to behold

Your lost country bought and sold

With a price of blood and gold –

 Let a vast assembly be,

And with great solemnity

Declare with measured words that ye

Are, as God has made ye, free …

 And these words shall then become

Like Oppression’s thundered doom

Ringing through each heart and brain

Heard again – again – again

Rise like Lions after slumber

In unvanquishable number

Shake your chains to earth like dew

Which in sleep had fallen on you –

Ye are many – they are few.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

For more information on Split this Rock and future poetry readings and
other events go to:
[*www.splitthisrock.org*](http://www.splitthisrock.org)

Sources:

*Masks of Anarchy: “The History of a Radical Poem, from Percey Shelley
to the Triangle Factory Fire,”* by Michael Demson, illustrated by Summer
McClinton, Verso Press, 2013 (includes Shelley’s poem by that name,
quoted above).

*Poetry*, March 2014 (Vol. CCIII, Number 6)

*BPJ Beloit Poetry Journal*, Split This Rock Chapbook, Spring 2012 (Vol.
62, Number 3)

Poetry Festival 2014, Split This Rock Program book.

*Selected Poetry and Prose of Percy Bysshe Shelley*, edited by Carlos
Baker, Modern Library (1951).

Quotes:

The complete “Mask of Death” is quoted from the Baker edited edition
(op. cit).

Adrienne Rich’s quote was included in the Split this Rock program book

The excerpts from Tim Seibles, Dunya Mikhail, Joy Harjo and Amiri Baraka
poems are all from the March 2014 issue of Poetry

Langston Hughes’ poem was included in the spring 2012 issue of BPJ

[*The coming Comcast juggernaut —a review
essay*](http://dsadc.org/the-coming-comcast-juggernaut-a-review-essay/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

One of the critical public utilities of our age – the one, in fact, that
makes this newsletter possible where it wouldn’t have been three decades
ago – is threatened with oligarchic control at great financial and
societal cost to the nation at large and almost no regulatory oversight
by government.

Yes, the good old brand new Internet is at risk of having at most three
big corporate gatekeepers, for whom provision of actual quality service
is a losing proposition forbidden by the overlords of Wall Street. A
decision on the merger of Comcast and Time Warner Cable is coming up,
sooner than we think, and the evidence is that the deciders, the Federal
Communications Commission and the Justice Department antitrust division,
have been captured for years by the [*lobbying
efforts*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/20/business/media/comcasts-real-repairman.html)
of the big players.

This is big business news, and [*decent
articles*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/business/media/questions-for-comcast-as-it-looks-to-grow.html)
about the stakes involved and the lobbying power being brought to bear
on the regulators and their Congressional paymasters have been
forthcoming<span id="_msoanchor_1" class="anchor"></span>*\]*. A
companion piece by Carolyn Byerly in this issue focuses on the FCC’s
vulnerability to the age of supercapital.

The grim details, including the unusual situation of a cable industry
that is resigned to losing TV customers and hustling hard to control the
Internet connections that will supplant TV, are best laid out in Susan
Crawford’s *Captive Audience: The Telecom Industry and Monopoly Power in
the New Gilded Age.* (Yale University Press 2013).

Crawford, a communications law professor at Harvard and Yeshiva/Cardozo,
has wisely been promoting her book <span id="_msoanchor_3"
class="anchor"></span>with the likes of Bill Moyers and NPR, because (as
she told Moyers) “The solution is for people to care about this issue,
ask hard questions at every debate.,..” Because this continues to be a
[*business-section
story*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/netflix-lays-out-opposition-to-comcast-time-warner-cable-merger-in-shareholder-letter/2014/04/21/7552190a-c9a2-11e3-a75e-463587891b57_story.html),
public awareness is of course far below the threshold needed to react to
the genuine crisis here.

Crisis? What crisis? Well, the lax regulatory scheme and the industry’s
highly skilled massaging of all the players concerned have brought poor
quality Internet provision, well below the emerging world standard of
fiber-optic delivery, at a price so much higher than the global average
that large numbers of people in the US can’t afford access. In *Captive
Audience* Crawford summarizes:

> “…the result is expensive, second-rate, carefully curated wired
> services for the rich, provided by Comcast and Time Warner; expensive,
> third-rate, carefully curated wireless services (or no services at
> all) for those who cannot afford a wire; close cooperation among the
> incumbent providers of wired and wireless services, and no public
> commitment to the advanced communications networks the rest of the
> developed world is adopting.”

“Curated,” we should note, has a particularly ominous meaning in
Crawford’s analysis, referring to the lock on large amounts of media
content that Comcast acquired in its last big merger coup, the scooping
up of NBC-Universal in 2010 that is the central subject of her book.
Control of content – especially live sports, which will be at the core
of the live events that may keep TV and cable alive – gave Comcast two
ways to block competitors, who would have to build infrastructure and
create or purchase content anytime they wanted to take on the giant that
already had in place. Conversely, Comcast/Time Warner Cable would have
the wherewithal to crush smaller cable companies and preemptively force
a merger or sale if this merger comes to pass.

And massive control of content would allow the new cable megacorp to
torment the customer with premium bundles of a variety of prices – all
of them high, and getting higher. Comcast’s lobbyists promise a lot of
things – but they are careful not to promise that their prices won’t go
higher.

If the Comcast-Time Warner merger is approved, the two cable companies
will dominate/control 19 out of the 20 major urban markets, 40 percent
of all broadband customers and 30 percent of cable customers nationally.
And they have cut a deal with Verizon and AT&T to leave the wireless to
them. The phone companies have stopped upgrading their copper wire to
fiber-optic and set their caps for wireless supremacy; the landline is
on the way out.

An important factor is that in the geographic markets Comcast/Time
Warner will control, they don’t need to extend their infrastructure to
include lower-income neighborhoods. Comcast, which started in
Mississippi, does not have a record of serving poor customers – they
wired the better-off parts of their franchise territory and made big
money charging high prices for service. Volume was not part of their
equation, not when the poor were concerned. Millions of people are not
“passed” by cable and can’t get hooked up if they want to. The FCC,
which is charged with weighing the public good in such mergers, has the
capacity to extract concessions such as more service to the low-income
and rural people who increasingly need Internet access to get and keep
jobs. But the FCC’s recent record on considering public need is as
dismal as Comcast’s, in large part because they have been out-lawyered
and their congressional overseers massaged with campaign dollars.

Crawford’s focus is on the potential for national revitalization that is
inherent in the Internet, not so much on the declining fortunes of cable
TV. Falling behind the rest of the world in reliable, reasonably priced
access to a technological wave that was developed on the US taxpayer’s
dime infuriates her. She tells Moyers

> Parents around the country know that their kids can’t get an adequate
> education without internet access. You can’t apply for a job these
> days without going online. You can’t get access to government benefits
> adequately, you can’t start a business. This feels to 300 million
> Americans like a utility, like something that’s just essential for
> life. And the issue of how it’s controlled and how expensive it is and
> how few Americans actually sign up for it is not really on the radar
> screen.

The notion that the Internet is a utility lies at the heart of questions
like “net neutrality” and concerns about the “digital divide” that grows
between those with Internet access and those priced out or in the wrong
neighborhood. It also, if applied vigorously by the FCC, would allow for
much stricter regulation of Comcast, and reclassification of the
cable/broadband infrastructure as a “common carrier.” If Comcast had
been recognized as the “common carrier” it is (like the erstwhile phone
companies) the purchase of NBC-Universal would have been disallowed by
both FCC and Justice as an impermissible mix of control over
infrastructure and content.

Crawford, like many consumer advocates and communications NGOs, argues
that the US is missing the boat and needs to re-engage in “industrial
policy” that will put a priority on the widest possible public access to
this latest and most versatile form of communication. Other nations are
taking those steps and providing faster Internet at much lower costs.
Crawford wrote in a Bloomberg View op-ed that “It’s time to recognize
that industrial policy — true leadership, the kinds of initiatives that
brought us the federal highway system and national electrification — is
called for.”

In a detailed example, she shows how many small cities are creating
their own broadband networks to advantage their citizens and businesses.
Every attempt, though, is assaulted with litigation by the associated
cable and Internet providers (a trade group helmed by Michael Powell,
Colin Powell’s son and a former, quite conservative, chairman of the FCC
under George W. Bush). Lafayette, Louisiana, for instance, had to
scuffle for nearly a decade to beat the legions of lawyers from the
corporations and create their broadband network. About 20 states have
passed ALEC-inspired laws forbidding or impeding their municipalities
from going their own way on this.

> “Instead of ensuring that everyone in America can compete in a global
> economy, instead of narrowing the divide between rich and poor,
> instead of supporting competitive free markets for American inventions
> that use information, instead that is of ensuring that America will
> lead the world in the U.S. in the information age, U.S. politicians
> have chosen to keep Comcast and its fellow giants happy,”Crawford
> writes in *Captive Audience*.

The communications law professor Tim Wu pointed out in *The New Yorker*
that cable providers can furnish broadband (of the slower sort they
offer) over their coaxial cables for about \$5 a month; the \$40 or so
they charge gives them a high margin indeed. At those margins, why would
they feel an incentive to upgrade their sorry infrastructure for better
or wider service? “Without the intervention of the government there’s no
reason for these guys to charge us anything reasonable or to make sure
that everybody has services,” Crawford said on the Moyers show.

Crawford’s book is written for popular consumption and to agitate
response to the relentless march of the telecoms. It is, however,
scholarly in the distance it goes into the weeds. Often this is
valuable; the jaw-dropping detail of Comcast’s lobbying, with promises
made and gifts given to critical constituencies like minority
organizations and consumer groups, is well laid out here. The ins and
outs of antitrust law and its evasion by magnates from John D.
Rockefeller to Brian Roberts, Comcast’s affable CEO, can get taffy-like,
however.

But socialists will recognize the skill with which Comcast and other
major capitalist enterprises weave a web of inevitability out of their
increasing command of what is purported to be a competitive market;
regulatory agencies, politicians of both capitalist parties and
organized groups are all swept into the fabric of oligarchy. Crawford’s
book and some enterprising journalism make it clear that there are big
stakes for the US in managing the outcome of the latest merger attempt,
either turning it down or hedging it with serious conditions that will
roll back the industry’s consolidation and control of this vital
utility.

Mega-players on the communications capitalism stage have faltered
before. Tim Wu, in his undervalued book *The Master Switch: The Rise and
Fall of Information Empires* outlines the history of major technological
utilities from the telegraph through telephone, radio and TV. He shows
how each behemoth overreached itself, raised public indignation and
essentially forced the courts to rein them in. His treatment of the
Internet holds out hope that net neutrality will be the cause that
brings the courts, or public opinion, or government to act.

It would be nice to hope that the cable giants will overreach as well
and the courts will step in. But they may, we feel, have overreached
without consequence already, and the courts we have today may not be the
courts we need to take a hand when we need it. The government has shown
itself pretty well bought off. Public outrage may have to be the main
impetus for change. Will it come soon enough?

[*The UN Panel on Climate Change: Challenges for
Progressives*](http://dsadc.org/the-un-panel-on-climate-change-challenges-for-progressives/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; May 2014**

*By Bill Boteler*

The latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change
(IPCC) notes that about half of cumulative carbon emissions between 1750
and 2010 took place in the past 40 years.

Sources of these emissions between 2000 and 2010 were energy supply 47%,
industry 30%, transport 11%, buildings 3%. Those are the areas where
policy change can potentially alter what now looks like a forbidding
future.

The IPCC has produced 3 reports since 2013. The first of these dealt
with observed and projected changes in the earth’s climate. The second
report, appearing in March of this year, dealt with how these changes
might probably affect ecosystems and human interests. The third, which
was just issued, proposes various scenarios for successfully mitigating
or preventing climate change in excess of 2 degrees C above
pre-industrial levels, which is considered a level that would be
associated with more serious damage to our planet. The latter two
reports get our attention here.

We have to note the irony about the IPCC report’s reception. The IPCC
scientists use terms like “high confidence” and “medium confidence” to
reflect lack of complete unanimity, giving opponents the opening to
blast their conclusions as poorly founded. Their deeply democratic
process masks the fact that [*nearly all the scientists agree on nearly
all the conclusions.
*](http://www.salon.com/2014/04/29/how_scientists_are_inadvertently_creating_climate_deniers/)

***Risks***

Projected risks from climate change mentioned in the report include
threats to water supplies, extinction of species, threats to food
security, health-related threats, and the impact of extreme weather
events on human security and the economy.

The report was in high agreement that the proportion of the human
population affected by water scarcity or by major river floods will
increase in the 21st century and may lead to more intense competition
for water.

There was high agreement that the loss or redistribution of marine
species by the mid 21st century will affect the productivity of
fisheries and other ecosystem services These changes will affect
fisheries and people dependent on them.

There was high confidence that projected changes will affect crop yields
with negative changes being more common than positive changes.

Major food crops like wheat and maize will be adversely affected so

there is high confidence that all aspects of food security will
potentially be affected by climate change.

Disease impacts will increase until mid-century, the main impacts on
human health will be from a worsening of problems that already exist.

Population displacement risk due to extreme weather and food insecurity
rises significantly and is greater when people lack resources for
planned migration and experience extreme weather events. People in both
urban and rural areas of developing countries are particularly at risk.

Risks to urban populations include heat stress, extreme precipitation,
flooding, landslides, air pollution drought and water scarcity. Risks to
rural populations include scarce water supplies, food security,
agricultural incomes and shifts production areas.

Climate change is projected to slow economic growth, make poverty
reduction more difficult, reduce food security and worsen existing
poverty while creating new poverty.

 The damage to natural systems and probable extinction events for a
significant portion of existing flora and fauna are a horrific prospect.
But to get institutional and behavioral changes that could slow or
mitigate climate change effects, socialists and other progressives have
to persuade people at every level of society, and that means talking
about the likely damage to their way of life and safety.

 

***Recommendations***

The report proposes that mitigation efforts should seek to keep
greenhouse gases at levels that allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to
climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and
that enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner.
Keeping global temperatures at below a 2 percent increase above
pre-industrial levels is the goal.

Any realistic mitigation policy requires large-scale changes in energy
and land use. All these scenarios are characterized by rapid improvement
in energy efficiency, tripling or quadrupling of the share of renewable
energy sources, nuclear energy, CO2 capture and storage or bioenergy
development. Land use changes include reforestation and reduced
deforestation.

Sustainable growth patterns would include a reduction in consumption
growth by 0.04 to 0.14 percentage points over the century relative to a
projected annual growth of between 1.6% and 3% per year.

There was high agreement that Infrastructure developments that lock
societies into GHG‐intensive emissions pathways may be difficult and
costly to change.

But emissions can be substantially lowered through changes in
consumption such as energy use in households, longer-lasting products,
changed diets and reduced food wastes.

Decarbonizing (i.e. reducing the carbon intensity of) electricity
generation is a key component of cost effective mitigation. In most
scenarios, decarbonization happens more rapidly in electricity
generation than in the industry, buildings, and transport sectors. In a
majority of these scenarios the share of renewable energy and nuclear
increases form 30% to 80% by 2050.

The transport sector accounted for 27% of direct emissions in 2010 and
there is medium agreement that is projected to approximately double by
2050, but technical and behavior changes plus new infrastructure and
urban redevelopment could reduce transport emissions by 15-40% by 2050.

In 2010, the industry sector accounted for around 28% of final energy
use,but the energy intensity of the industry sector could be directly
reduced by about 25% compared to the current level through the widescale
upgrading, replacement and deployment of best available
technologies~~.~~

 Agriculture and forestry (called AFOLU) plays a central role for food
security and sustainable development. Promoting reforestation and
reducing deforestation along with better land management in agriculture
and alternative methods in societies where wood is used for cooking and
heating are critical to net carbon reduction.

Urbanization is a global trend and is associated with increases in
income, and higher urban incomes are correlated with higher consumption
of energy and GHG emissions (medium evidence, high agreement). So the
next two decades present a window of opportunity for mitigation in urban
areas, as a large portion of the world’s urban areas will be developed
during this period.

There was wide agreement that the largest mitigation opportunities with
respect to human settlements are in rapidly urbanizing areas where urban
form and infrastructure are not locked in.

Finally, and of most interest to socialists and other economic
progressives, substantial reductions in emissions would require large
changes in investment patterns.

There was high agreement in the value of regulatory and information
approaches. The report notes that many national governments have
included climate concerns in their legislative and regulatory criteria
and that cap-and-trade systems, for instance, have been installed though
their effect has been limited. Policies that reduce subsidies for
high-carbon industries have been effective as well.

There was high agreement that technology policy complements other
mitigation policies and that this could include a push by governments to
publicly fund research and development.

 Research on energy efficiency and production with renewables could go a
long way toward easing the transition to what is already guaranteed to
be a warmer planet. But even a magic bullet will only work if it
outcompetes fossil fuels, unless a significant worldwide movement puts a
price on them that reflects their true cost. Socialists and other
progressives will have to make the case that lower consumption and a
sustainable level of economic activity are necessary and can be adapted
and adopted by industrial nations, and that a new lifestyle for a
changed environment is thinkable, and necessary.
