***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the March 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the Washington Socialist for March
2014*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-washington-socialist-for-march-2014/)

Wednesday, March 5th, 2014

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

Welcome to the *Washington Socialist*’s March 2014 issue.

Note that our regular membership meeting is Saturday, March 8 at 2:30
p.m. at the Cleveland Park Library branch, 3310 Connecticut Ave. NW,
Washington DC 20008. The Cleveland Park metro station is a two-block
walk. The steering committee meets at 1 p.m.; all members are welcome to
attend that as well.

IN THIS ISSUE:

Bill Mosley
[*notes*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=d399ae59b8&e=003de9ccab)
Pro-**DC statehood** organizations will hold a candidate forum on March
10 to hold office-seekers’ feet to the fire on how they will support the
cause of statehood and DC’s autonomy from Congress.  All candidates on
the ballot for Mayor, Delegate to the House of Representatives,
Statehood Senator and Statehood Representative will be invited.

The long quest to reduce structural inequality in capitalist society has
meant that an idea of a **minimum wage** has deep roots in history. The
current struggle to update the wage to meet the stresses of late
capitalism is read more easily against the in-depth history of the
minimum wage
[*provided*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=133ac33e34&e=003de9ccab)
by Kurt Stand.

After World War II, **Italy’s Communist Party**(CP) was strong and
popular, and the Truman administration worked tirelessly to keep them
out of the country’s leadership. The party was assimilating the ideas of
Antonio Gramsci and showing a post-Stalin sophistication that other
European CPs were unable to match. Andy Feeney
[*reviews*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ea55a7ab3f&e=003de9ccab)
a new book on the era that should have — but may lack — some lessons for
today’s left in our struggle against advanced hegemonic capitalism.

Last month, Metro-DC Democratic Socialists of America made its
**endorsements** for the April 1 DC primary election.  As Bill Mosley
[*writes*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=eeb5dcb21a&e=003de9ccab),
the local made three endorsements in the Democratic primary:  Andy
Shallal for Mayor, Phil Mendelson for Council Chair, and Eleanor Holmes
Norton for Delegate to the House of Representatives.

“Particle Fever” shows how **big science** is increasingly done these
days. The movie, about the international, coordinated search for the
Higgs Boson by CERN, demonstrates that research is increasingly a social
activity, not the realm of the individual lightning-catcher. A [*movie
review*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7148eaf89a&e=003de9ccab)
by Dan Adkins.

Just a little over a month into the **Maryland legislature**’s
three-month session, some high-priority bills for progressives are
hanging on, an outrageous payback to the wealthy appears to be emerging,
and some interesting low-profile progressive bills are gaining strength.
Low-wage workers are likely to be the beneficiaries of action on the
minimum wage, earned sick leave, ex-offender employability and job
retraining and realignment as the state adjusts to a drawdown from the
era of military adventurism from which we are slowly emerging. But never
underestimate the skills of the state’s allegedly deep-blue but quite
business-friendly political leadership when the legislature is in
session. Woody Woodruff
[*reports*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=45d3f0e0a6&e=003de9ccab)
on the scene near the halfway point.

As Bill Mosley
[*writes*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f18373d79b&e=003de9ccab),
last year’s 16-day furlough of federal employees was only the best-known
of a series of recent **attacks by Congress against the government
workforce**.  Unsurprisingly, this is causing an increasing number of
current federal workers to seek to leave the government, either through
retirement or moving to the private sector, while fewer new graduates
see civil service as an attractive career option.  And this is part of
the conservative plan: A shrunken, demoralized, less-qualified,
less-motivated federal workforce will lead to a government even less
able to serve the public and act as a check on runaway corporate abuses.

As the **NSA scandal** deepens, countries around the world (friendly and
not so) show increasing concern about the security of their Internet
communications. Some plan to route their traffic around the US and the
big telecom outfits cooperating with the spooks; that could change the
game in Net neutrality and access, as well as US primacy in net
economics. Dan Adkins has a
[*follow-up*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=a4d59bc2f2&e=003de9ccab)
on his recent WS piece.

The skewing of public criminal justice outcomes by politics are well
illustrated by the cases of **Mumia Abu-Jamal**, imprisoned for 33 years
on dubious evidence of capital murder, and **Angela Davis**, whose
radicalism cost her an academic post under then-Gov. Ronald Reagan and,
for a time, her freedom. Kurt Stand
[*examines*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=68152162c8&e=003de9ccab)
a recent movie and book on their respective cases and outlines the
structural flaws in the system that keeps political radicalism hazardous
to one’s freedom, then and now…

As always, we’ve
[*picked*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=cb5d70ea21&e=003de9ccab)
a few good magazine or web articles on the left that you may have missed
for **“Good Reads.”** Don’t forget to send us ***your*** nominees for
the April issue anytime before March 25.

[*A Long Moment in the Leftwing Sun: On Italian “Eurocommunism” and Its
Demise*](http://dsadc.org/a-long-moment-in-the-leftwing-sun-on-italian-eurocommunism-and-its-demise/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

**Book review of Lucio Magri’s *The Tailor of Ulm:  Communism in the
Twentieth Century,* translated from the Italian by Patrick Camiller. 
(London and New York, Verso, 2011), \$49.95 HB.**

For a number of leading Western leftists who have pondered the fate of
socialism since the Russian Revolution, the performance of the Italian
Communist Party (PCI) from the mid-1940s through the early 1980s has
been a source of hope and inspiration.  For several decades,  before its
leadership voluntarily dissolved the organization in 1991 to form a new
“Democratic Party of the Left” that has since partly disappeared in the
shuffle of Italian politics, the PCI seemed to be the subject of a
left-wing Cinderella story.

Nearly wiped out by Mussolini’s fascism in the 1920s, the party
recovered rapidly in numbers and political clout following Mussolini’s
fall and by 1946 had some 2 million members, making it one of the
largest Communist parties in the world at the time.  Although (or
because) its leaders gradually weaned themselves from uncritical
admiration for the Soviet Union over the decades, the PCI by the 1970s
was able to command roughly 25 percent of the Italian vote, and in the
election of 1984 it received more than 33 percent of the votes cast,
giving it the most votes of any Italian party that year.

Thanks in part to its loyal membership base,  in part to its flexibility
and its willingness to formulate a distinct “Italian road to socialism”
that promised to respect electoral politics and democratic rights while
pushing for radical economic change, the PCI by the 1970s was considered
a leader in what was known as “Eurocommunism,” a movement that
positioned itself to the left of established social democratic parties
yet while embracing a commitment to representative politics as opposed
to Soviet-style authoritarianism.   Accordingly, the party increasingly
attracted the interest of influential leftists, both inside and outside
of the international Communist movement.

By the late 1980s, DSA’s co-founder Michael Harrington was among those
democratically inclined Marxist thinkers who looked to the writings of
Antonio Gramsci, a PCI leader who did most of his most influential
theoretical work in Mussolini’s prison system in the 1930s, for ideas on
how strong socialist movements might best survive under basically
“non-revolutionary” conditions in the affluent capitalist West.

Today, too, there is a revived interest in Gramsci’s ideas within the
U.S. left, as DSA activists (among others) look to his writings on
socialist strategies of “counter-hegemony” and the gradualist “war of
position” (as opposed to an insurrectionary “war of maneuver”) for clues
on how American progressives can avoid the likely pitfalls of a politics
of revolt while also shunning a politics of compromise and accommodation
with capitalist austerity politics – a trap that has caught all too many
European social democratic parties in recent decades.

There has been considerable interest on the American left, therefore, in
Lucio Magri’s 2011 book *The Tailor of Ulm,* which despite its full
title is largely an account of the PCI’s political rise and eventual
fall, as seen by a former dissident member of the party.

Magri, at one time somewhat close to the PCI’s top leadership, was
temporarily expelled in 1968 for joining with several comrades in
publishing an independent critical journal, *Il Manifesto,* yet he
apparently remained supportive of the PCI and concerned about its
fortunes for long afterwards.

In 1991, he reacted very negatively to the party’s leadership dropping
the word “Communist” from the organization’s name and rebranding it as
the new Democratic Party of the Left – a change, Magri writes, that led
to the resignation of about one-third of the members at the time.  In
the early 1990s Magri was involved for a least some period in the
launching of a “Refoundationist” Communist group that attempted to
revive the PCI’s old reputation for militancy.  And in *The Tailor of
Ulm*, he attempts to reconstruct a history of what the PCI did well and
what it did less successfully over the decades leading to its
dissolution.

DSA members and other American progressives with a real interest in and
some prior knowledge of the twists and turns of Marxist and socialist
politics in the twentieth century will find much in *The Tailor of Ulm*
that is fascinating, or at the very least, memorable.

For example, Magri’s view of how the Truman administration contributed
to the launching of the Cold War shortly following the end of World War
II should trigger lasting second thoughts among reflexively
anti-Communist Americans who have grown up believing that Stalin’s
ambitions in Eastern Europe were primarily responsible for the dramatic
break between the major capitalist democracies and a Stalinist USSR that
had contributed some 20 million lives and suffered huge losses in
agricultural and industrial productivity to help the Allies win the war
against Nazi Germany.

However ruthless Stalin was capable of being, Magri, argues,  the Soviet
Union in 1946 was still suffering heavily from the war’s devastation and
was simply incapable of imposing the kind of “Iron Curtain” on Eastern
Europe that Churchill complained of in a famous 1947 speech that is
generally seen as an opening salvo in the Cold War.  By 1948 Stalin had
responded to the threat of western aggression by liquidating fledgling
coalition governments in Eastern Europe, often quite brutally, and in
this way caused Soviet foreign policy to match Churchill’s nasty
stereotype, Magri concludes.  But blame for more than 30 years of
nuclear-inspired tensions between the West and the Soviet bloc did not
originate with Stalin.  Even for anti-Communist Americans, that’s one
argument in this book that is worth remembering.

Similarly, in his account of Italian politics in the 1950s, Magri offers
an interesting slant on the role that the U.S. played in repeated
efforts to pressure the Italian government to ban the PCI at the time,
in defiance of Italy’s own postwar constitution.  He attributes the
PCI’s surprising persistence and growth in spite of such pressures
largely to the paradoxical effects of a rapid industrialization of the
previously backward Italian economy that was essentially carried out by
rather ruthless and predatory Italian capitalists, who themselves
benefited from the U.S.-backed Marshall Plan.

Yet what *The Tailor of Ulm* mostly does not provide, unfortunately, is
anything resembling a left-wing organizer’s recipe book that DSA
activists and other progressives might draw on in hopes of duplicating
in the United States some of the successes that the PCI won in Italy.
  Perhaps there are such overwhelming differences between the backward
but rapidly modernizing Italian economy in the 1950s and the rich but
sluggish U.S. economy today that make such a left-wing cookbook
impossible; Magri’s analysis suggests that there probably are.  Yet it
would have been intriguing if he provided more tactical details on how
the PCI won and maintained its once promising position in Italian
politics and the global Communist movement, and this book,
unfortunately, is mostly lacking in them.

For example, the PCI under Fascist repression in the 1930s dwindled in
size to fewer than 20,000 members, yet between 1943 when an armed
Italian resistance began against the remnants of Fascism in the
German-occupied north of the country and the reconstruction of Italy in
1946, card-carrying PCI members grew rapidly to 100 times that number.
 The PCI also won a huge and influential presence in the Italian trade
unions by this time, one it had mostly not enjoyed in the 1920s.

Well, apart from the participation of brave and disciplined PCI members
in the resistance, how was this seeming miracle accomplished?  Magri
mostly doesn’t say.

Again, Magri states near the start of his history that the PCI’s
Palimiro Togliatti led the party to success largely by drawing on
Gramsci’s political theories.  Yet almost nowhere in Tailor of Ulm does
Magri state just which of those theories were most important or how
exactly the PCI tried to put them into practice.

Similarly, the PCI by the late 1970s was already becoming famous for
electing mayors and city council members to big industrial towns in the
north of Italy and running municipal governments that were remarkably
honest and effective, especially compared with the ruling Christian
Democratic Party’s record for scandalous  corruption (and sometimes
collaboration with the Mafia) elsewhere in the country.

How did the PCI’s electoral politics work?  Why were its politicians so
much more honest (on average) than the Christian Democratic and
sometimes the Socialist opposition?  How, too, was the PCI able to
command more than a third of the national vote in the mid-1980s, even
though the prestige of Communism was declining sharply in other parts of
Europe by this time?  Again, Magri offers some tantalizing hints, but
doesn’t really say.

For these reasons, *The Tailor of Ulm* is probably not a book for
younger socialist readers with an activist bent, who are looking for
helpful organizing tips from a foreign socialist party that was famous
in its day for mass support and successful mobilizations.  For readers
with an abiding interest in the history of Marxist movements and a sense
of how “Eurocommunism” gradually emerged from a once seemingly
monolithic Third International, however, this is a book that may well be
worth its \$60 price.

For DSA readers who are interested in getting an introduction to
Gramsci’s theories, meanwhile, Verso has another recent anthology, with
an introduction by the late Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm, sampling
Gramsci’s early writings as a firebrand leader of factory occupations in
Turin, as well as some key passages from his *Prison Notebooks* composed
in the 1930s.

[*An Update on Maryland’s
Legislature*](http://dsadc.org/an-update-on-marylands-legislature/)

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* March 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Just a little over a month into the Maryland legislature’s three-month
session, some high-priority bills for progressives are hanging on, an
outrageous payback to the wealthy appears to be emerging, and some
interesting low-profile progressive bills are gaining strength. Low-wage
workers are likely to be the beneficiaries of action on the minimum
wage, earned sick leave, ex-offender employability and job retraining
and realignment as the state adjusts to a drawdown from the era of
military adventurism from which we are slowly emerging. But never
underestimate the skills of the state’s allegedly deep-blue but quite
business-friendly political leadership when the legislature is in
session.

**MINIMUM WAGE** The bills in the House and Senate were filed by the
respective chamber leaders on behalf of Gov. Martin O’Malley, who wants
the popular measure to be a marker of his last year in office. He told a
rally:  “If it \[the \$7.25/hr minimum wage\] had kept pace with worker
productivity, it would be \$20 an hour right now. If it had kept pace
with the earnings of Ronald Reagan’s top 1 percent, it would be \$273.”

[*The Sun reported Feb. 17
*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-sun-poll-wage-marijuana-20140218,0,5747598.story#ixzz2uGlGY0sa)that
“By a wide margin, Maryland voters want to raise the state’s minimum
wage to \$10.10 an hour, a poll conducted for The Baltimore Sun shows. …
Statewide, 69 percent of voters surveyed said they back a proposal now
being debated in the General Assembly to increase Maryland’s minimum
wage from the current federal level of \$7.25 an hour to \$10.10 by
2016.” That roughly matches the 71 percent national positive view of a
minimum wage increase shown in most recent polls.

The two “cross-filed” bills (SB 331 and HB 295) have each had crowded
and grueling hearings in crucial committees. US Rep. Elijah Cummings was
a top supporter Feb. 17 at the [*Senate Finance
Committee,*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/bs-md-senate-minimum-wage-20140217,0,7771211.story)
where business owners threatened closures of two, three, many Wendy’s if
it passes. GMU economist Stephen Fuller, a favorite of business,
predicted 6000 jobs lost but Economic Policy Institute’s David Cooper
argued that most data showed little long-term job losses historically
despite short-term adjustment bumps.

HB 295’s hearing saw over 100 speakers at the Feb. 11 House Economic
Matters Committee meeting, noted chair Dereck Davis. Aisha Braveboy, a
Prince George’s delegate, testified about the poor nutrition available
to minimum wage workers and the damage to their children. “They are not
empowered economically.”

With the support of Senate leader Mike Miller and House speaker Mike
Busch, the main thrust of the wage hike will probably pass, but many
ambushes and qualifiers remain.

**ESTATE TAX BREAK**: As if to acknowledge that the impetus behind the
minimum wage would require some payback to big business (never far from
their hearts), Busch and Miller have sponsored bills “to increase the
Maryland estate tax exemption from the current level of \$1 million to
the federal level of \$5.34 million.“  That would allow more large
estates to escape paying a fair share and solve what the business right
that lurks inside Maryland’s ostensible left to solve what they seem to
feel is a millionaire drain. By that notion, the really rich are
relocating official residences in other, better states to die.

In [*a thorough takedown of the
maneuver*](http://www.marylandjuice.com/2014/02/guest-post-progressive-maryland-sounds.html)
– which has rounded up some ordinarily quite progressive sponsors –
Progressive Maryland points out the cost to state revenues of this
sneaky move.

[*The Sun reported Feb.
2*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/bs-bz-estate-tax-20140130,0,5064698.story)
that “Warren Deschenaux, the legislature’s chief policy analyst, isn’t
convinced. The man whose job it is to throw cold water on many
legislative tax-cutting ideas said bringing the exemption to the federal
level would cost \$80 million to \$90 million a year in revenue when
fully implemented” with little likelihood that revenue would be made up
elsewhere. Another Sun interviewee pointed out that real tax relief,
costing about the same in revenue, would be expanding the state’s earned
income tax credit.

**EARNED SAFE AND SICK LEAVE BILL** The proposal to give over 700,000
Marylanders a chance to care for sick children or their own ills without
getting fired or (further) impoverished was reintroduced by sponsor Tom
Olszewski. At the House hearing Feb. 18 Olszewski outlined changes from
last year that he said answered [*some of the businesses’ concerns that
sank it
before*](http://dsadc.org/paid-sick-leave-minimum-wage-advocates-planning-round-2-in-md-legislature/)
(he withdrew the 2013 version after an unfavorable committee report, and
the Senate bill died in committee without action). They included
exempting employers with fewer than 10 employees and the exclusion of
some part-time and seasonal employees. The core proposal – that
employees can incrementally earn paid leave they can use when they or a
family member are sick – remains. The dreaded “fiscal note” that
accompanies the revised bill still points out “significant” small
business effects, enforcement costs to the state and increased costs to
the hall of shame of local governments that don’t offer paid leave now.
Work by the Institute for Women’s Policy Research is offered in the
fiscal note to bolster the contention that additional costs to
businesses for providing leave are essentially offset by factors of
increased productivity and reduced turnover. The [*Job Opportunities
Task
Force*](http://www.jotf.org/Advocacy/AnnapolisWatch2014/tabid/253/Default.aspx)
of Baltimore website Feb. 24 said both House (HB968) and Senate (SB743)
versions were awaiting a committee vote.

**MARYLAND SECOND CHANCE ACT** Companion bills that would allow
nonviolent ex-offenders’ records to be shielded for purposes of
employment were introduced in the Senate [*SB
1056*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frmMain.aspx?id=sb1056&stab=01&pid=billpage&tab=subject3&ys=2014RS)
 by Montgomery Sen. Jamie Raskin and the House [*HB
1166*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frmMain.aspx?id=hb1166&stab=01&pid=billpage&tab=subject3&ys=2014RS) 
by Baltimore City’s Curt Anderson. As the [*Job Opportunities Task
Force*](http://www.jotf.org/Advocacy/AnnapolisWatch2014/tabid/253/Default.aspx)
points out, “Jobs are the key to our economic recovery, and the ability
to secure a job is crucial to the successful reentry of those returning
to society from prison.”

Research shows that recidivism risks are highest in the first 3-5 years
following incarceration. Given that recidivism declines steadily over
time, the proposed legislation would make certain nonviolent misdemeanor
convictions eligible for shielding after a waiting period. Law
enforcement will continue to have access to the shielded records. The
bills are awaiting committee hearings in March.

**COMMISSION ON MARYLAND’S FUTURE**

A healthy and savvy lobbying effort is getting considerable legislative
attention to [*a proposed
commission*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-looks-at-formal-state-body-on-defense-transition/)
that would represent a soft industrial policy for a postwar Maryland. In
the words of Miriam Pemberton of IPS, to “get to work on a plan to align
our economic strategy with a smaller defense market.”

SB 493 would represent also an economic conversion project, aiming at
turning the state’s heavy dependence on \$36 billion annually in
military spending toward R&D and worker training in innovative and
renewable energy technologies.

Pemberton’s testimony before the Senate Finance Committee Feb. 18 noted:
“The commission would not enforce change on any specific businesses.
 Rather it would examine ways the state’s existing and emerging
competitive advantages can be linked to the needs of communities,
workers and businesses facing this historic transition. It will outline
a general diversification plan, identifying best practices and most
useful ways states can facilitate the transition. It will develop a plan
for taking advantage of existing federal programs available for this
purpose.

Economic development specialists agree that advanced planning is
critical to the success of an economic transition strategy.”

Bob Stewart, executive director of Local 1994 MCGEO, the public
employees’ union, stressed that early action on job training was
critical to staying ahead of the curve.

Pemberton and Fund Our Communities leader Jean Athey were joined in
testimony and support by other union representatives, civil rights
organizations and Montgomery County’s Chamber of Commerce.

The project was developed by a coalition led by Fund Our Communities, a
Peace Action affiliate that pushes for conversion of military to social
spending. comprising those groups and others and drafted by lead Senate
sponsors Richard Madaleno and Roger Manno. The Senate version gained the
support of Allan Kittleman, GOP leader. HB 738, the House counterpart,
has 30 sponsors including lead sponsor Talmadge Branch of Baltimore
City, the majority whip.

To a state that had been hoping to build a rep as a “Silicon Valley
East” around the bandits who are clustering on the NSA’s part of the
map, the idea of a little planning might have appeal. Maryland has been
almost terminally embarrassed by a miserable IT-procurement experience
with its state Affordable Care Act website.

The House version faced a hearing Feb. 26 before that graveyard of good
ideas, the House Economic Matters Committee. But the low initial cost of
such a study panel should get it through those straits.

[*DC Statehood Advocates to Hold Candidate Forum on March
10*](http://dsadc.org/dc-statehood-advocates-to-hold-candidate-forum-on-march-10/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

Organizations advocating statehood for the District of Columbia will
hold a forum for DC candidates for mayor, delegate to the House of
Representatives, US (shadow) senator and US (shadow) representative on
Monday, March 10.

The forum, which will take place from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. at Martin Luther
King Jr. Memorial Library, is sponsored by the Stand Up! For Democracy
in DC Coalition and the DC Statehood Coalition, with MLK Library
co-sponsoring the event.

The forum will focus on what the candidates would do to advance the
cause of DC statehood and help give the District greater autonomy from
Congress.  Candidates from all parties appearing on the April 1 primary
ballot are being invited to participate.  Members of the public will be
able to question the candidates.

The library is located at 901 G St. NW at the Gallery Place Metro stop.

For information, contact
[*billmosley@comcast.net*](mailto:billmosley@comcast.net).

[*Film Review of Particle
Fever*](http://dsadc.org/film-review-of-particle-fever/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

*By Dan Adkins*

*Particle Fever  (99 minutes): A Film review*

*Particle Fever* is a celebration of discovery of the Higgs Boson
particle and a documentary of the European Organization for Nuclear
Research (CERN) quest to find it using the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). 
The film follows six scientists during the launch of the collider, its
problems, and the scientific search.

The LHC is one of the most complex machines humans have ever made.  The
research effort includes 10,000 scientists from over 100 countries,
including countries in conflict with each other.  The research data is
processed in computers all around the globe.   Although the Defense
Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) created the internet protocols,
CERN created the World Wide Web interface to share research
communications.

In the past, major breakthroughs in science and technology have been
made by individuals or groups.  This film shows that major breakthroughs
now are based on world-wide collaborations by scientists, technitions,
and nations.  The idea that great men make history is being replaced by
the reality of the social means of research.

The physics is not fully explained and the math is beyond most of us
anyway.  Yet one does get the gist of the scientific method and the
division between the theorists and the experiential scientists who are
the only one who can validate the theories.  The documentary is edited
so that it feels like a drama and the soundtrack adds to the suspense.

Among the film’s comments was that it is true that 85% of the scientists
are male.  Among the women scientists there is a saying that “The odds
are good, but the goods are odd.”

The film will be available in many theaters March 5^th^.

Check out the trailer:
[*http://trailers.apple.com/trailers/independent/particlefever/*](http://trailers.apple.com/trailers/independent/particlefever/)

[*GOOD READS FOR MARCH
2014*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-march-2014/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

Recent, accessible online magazine and journal articles in our political
frame that caught our eye and that you might have missed…

 

Alyssa Battistoni’s “Alive in the Sunshine,” from *Jacobin*, was cited
here a few months ago. She continues to weave environmentalism and
radical futurism provocatively. Here’s another from her and *Jacobin*:
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/01/toward-cyborg-socialism/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/01/toward-cyborg-socialism/)

Howard Schneider covers world economic policy for the *Washington Post*
and does well at it, shoring up the quality of that flagging enterprise.
 Here, speaking of provocative headlines, is news of a welcome shift in
IMF policy about the relationship between growth and redistribution:
[*http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/02/26/communists-have-seized-the-imf/*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/02/26/communists-have-seized-the-imf/)

\[From Andy Feeney\] In the mainstream U.S. media and the business
press, it’s common these days to read glowing accounts of how basically
pro-market economic reforms in India have been improving lives and
creating new wealth since the country was opened up more to global
market forces in the 1990s.  But according to a feature story in the
Feb. 22 New York Times, this economic revolution seems to be literally
killing many of India’s poorer farmers. Since 1995, some 290,000 Indian
farmers have committed suicide, the Times reports, and while the
government doesn’t have reliable statistics on what motivated these
suicides, anecdotal evidence suggests many farmers have taken out loans
at ruinously high interest rates from local money lenders, in hopes of
competing more effectively in a more open market.   When their crops
fail or the borrowers can’t compete as effectively as they had planned,
pressures from the money lenders for repayment are causing significant
numbers of farmers to kill themselves.

[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/23/world/asia/after-farmers-commit-suicide-debts-fall-on-families-in-india.html?\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/23/world/asia/after-farmers-commit-suicide-debts-fall-on-families-in-india.html?_r=0)

\[from Andy Feeney\] Coming Soon:  Robotic, Self-Driving Slot Cars\
To Boost Electronics Revolution in the Toy Biz

A group of brilliant Ph.D’s in San Francisco have designed the world’s
first self-driving, quasi-robotic toy race cars, according to USA Today
reporter Marco della Cava.  Boris Sofman, the leader of a group of
high-tech engineers working at the 2007 start-up firm Anki, has
succeeded with his colleagues in taking toy race cars out of the
traditional “slot car” setting and equipping each toy racer with a
50-megahertz processor, giving these toys “more power than a late ’80s
computer.”

The resulting product, a toy that its inventors call “Drive,” is priced
at around \$200 and consists of a “monstrously fiendish sports care …
imbued with the ability to sense its competitors and plot its own race”
while still responding to commands from each race car owner’s iPhone.

According to USA Today, “Drive is merely Anki’s fun-filled initial foray
into consumer robotics.”  The feature article notes that the “mere
mention of robots tends to conjure fears, from manufacturing jobs
vanishing to self-driving cars glitching with tragic results,” but adds
that Sofman, the son of a Russian immigrant father who works for a large
telecomm company, “just smiles” at such worries.

“Think of the first time people were told to get in an airplane,” Sofman
told reporter della Cava. “There are psychological stepping stones, but
we’ll get over them.”   Some observers, the USA Today article reports,
“feel confident Sofman and his team will lead us over that psychological
hurdle and into peaceful coexistence with autonomous devices.”

[*http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2014/02/25/change-agents-boris-sofman-anki-robotics/5437293/*](http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2014/02/25/change-agents-boris-sofman-anki-robotics/5437293/)

Updated March 4 to add: Tom Edsall has a thorough tour of the recently
elaborated question: what’s the relationship between economic inequality
and economic growth? Is there an “optimal level of inequality”? This, of
course, is asked in a capitalist system. …\
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/05/opinion/edsall-just-right-inequality.html?hp&rref=opinion*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/05/opinion/edsall-just-right-inequality.html?hp&rref=opinion)

***We know there are more good reads out there. Send us yours!
&lt;WS&gt;***

[*History of the Movement for a Minimum
Wage*](http://dsadc.org/history-of-the-movement-for-a-minimum-wage/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

*By Kurt Stand*

“It is but equity…that they who feed, clothe and lodge the whole body of
the people, should have such a share of the produce of their own labor
as to be themselves tolerably well fed, clothed and lodged.”*-Adam
Smith, **The Wealth of Nations**, 1776*

* *

At the origins of the capitalist system, the hope was that the wealth
generated by the free market would lift all.  This was not to be.  In a
system that recognizes no limits, unions and social legislation became
necessary in order to provide a floor below which living standards would
not fall.  It was out of this recognition that the movement for a
minimum wage emerged.

** **

**ONE**

During one of his fireside chats on the radio in 1937, President
Franklin D. Roosevelt initiated the legislative campaign for the Fair
Labor Standards Act (FLSA) – the culminating New Deal legislation – with
the remark that,

“A self-supporting and self-respecting democracy can plead no
justification for the existence of child labor, no economic reason for
chiseling on workers’ wages or stretching workers’ hours.”

Later that year, when the Bill was introduced in Congress, he explained
the economic logic that made its passage so important for society as a
whole, society still mired in the Great Depression,

“The exploitation of child labor and the undercutting of wages and the
stretching of the hours of the poorest paid workers in periods of
business recession had a serious effect on buying power … What does the
country ultimately gain if we encourage businessmen to enlarge the
capacity of American industry to produce unless we see to it that the
income of our working population actually expands sufficiently to create
markets to absorb that increased production?”

These comments are important to keep in mind today as we campaign for
the increased minimum wage for in them are the two threads that have
been constants in the efforts to raise the minimum wage – the moral
argument that it is undemocratic and unjust to condemn people to poverty
and the economic argument that increasing wages for those with the least
benefits all, including business, by increasing purchasing power and
thereby expanding markets and reviving the economy.

Thus the need for a minimum wage – and for a minimum wage that can help
lift working people out of poverty – is not an isolated act, nor an act
of charity, rather it is rooted in the needs of the vast majority.  This
broader understanding was inherent in FSLA from its inception, for the
Act combined increasing wages with cutting hours (minimum wage, maximum
hours), for the first time establishing a 40-hour week.  And the
legislation, for the first time, made child labor illegal in the United
States.

 

**TWO**

But success did not come quickly or easily; in fact the legislation
itself was the culmination of many decades of struggle.  From the
earliest days of the workers movement demands were put forward to end
poverty wages, for a limitation on work hours and a ban on child labor. 
These, however, ran aground, in part due to a Supreme Court ruling in
the 1880s with implications with which we must still live – the decision
that the 14^th^ Amendment making African American citizens would be a
perfect vehicle to twist around and turn corporations into people.  If
today that interpretation means that corporations can have free speech,
then it meant that they were entitled to “due process,” under the 5^th^
amendment – therefore, compelling a company to pay workers a minimum
wage, compelling business to reduce labor from 12 or 14 hours a day,
compelling an employer to only hire adults, was considered a denial of
liberty akin to taking someone’s property.

Thus the movement focused in the early parts of the 20^th^ century on a
minimum wage for women workers because women as a “protected,” class
might escape that usage of the constitution.  And, more important, it
would prove of direct benefit to women employed in sweatshops, textile
mills, garment factories, and other industries where their “protected”
status did not prevent them from being ruthlessly exploited. 
Campaigning began in earnest around 1910 by middle-class reformers
(without much labor support, though it was backed by the Women’s Trade
Union League) and was joined to a campaign against child labor (another
“protected” group left unprotected from the ravages of poverty).

Between 1912 and 1919, 15 states, Washington DC and Puerto Rico enacted
minimum wage statutes with the explicit object of enabling women to earn
a “living wage.”  Men were excluded not only because it was thought more
possible to uphold constitutional scrutiny as a protective act for women
but also because the AFL craft unions were absolutely opposed to a
minimum wage for men (fearing it would become a maximum wage and wanting
to keep government out of collective bargaining).  The resulting
minimums were just enough to get by on, and – set as flat rates — unable
to keep up with inflation.

Even such progress was halted when Children’s Hospital in Washington DC
(the predecessor of the one today in Brookland; a plaque stands near
Metro Center indicating where it once stood) decided that it was paying
its female workforce too much money.  In 1923, the Supreme Court in
Adkins v. Children’s Hospital ruled in the hospital’s favor, declaring
all minimum wage laws unconstitutional.  Then, as now, a conservative
court claimed that it was preserving states’ rights – even though, it
acted to invalidate state law (no different than what happens with
campaign finance reform).  Then, as now, it took the position that any
interference with the “free market” would cause economic ruin and that
raising the pay for the poorest would only cause higher unemployment. 
Any government action to defend economic and social justice was judged
dictatorial – thus any employer could pay as little as it could get away
with, force workers to work as many hours as it demanded, and employ
children at any age, no matter how young.

Thereafter, one state after the other abolished their labor
protections.  By the end of the decade the Progressive era law only
survived in Massachusetts, and there it was ineffective and unenforced.
Harvard University took the first step to undoing the state minimum wage
by firing all its women employees and replacing them with men whom they
paid even less.  Soon most employers simply stopped complying with the
law.

But the end of 1929 saw the beginning of the Depression, the collapse of
business and finance, the rise of unemployment to over a quarter of the
workforce.  Developments all of which gave the lie to arguments that
unrestricted capitalism was economically sound and in the public
interest.  In the outburst of social activism that followed, a new
campaign was underway.  The minimum wage fight was led by those most
active in “settlement house work” – that is amongst the urban poor,
especially women.  Frances Perkins, whose name today adorns the
Department of Labor, was amongst them.  She was the first woman ever to
serve as a cabinet member, and she became the longest serving of any
cabinet member, staying with FDR throughout his Administration.  Her
decision to accept the post of Secretary of Labor, however, was
dependent on FDR’s commitment to see minimum wage legislation through to
its passage.

Also involved were progressive, social-minded unionists – the industrial
unions grouped in the CIO rejected the AFL’s position (most craft unions
opposed almost all New Deal social legislation until World War II) and
fought for universal provisions/standards for health, pensions, work
hours, wages.  A leader in the minimum wage movement was Sidney Hillman
of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union.  For a union such as the ACW,
representing workers in a low-wage industry, negotiating with multiple
employers, a wage floor was needed not only as a good in and of itself;
it was also a means to prevent non-union employers from undercutting
unionized employers by paying substandard wages.  It was for this reason
that a number of small northern manufacturers concerned about runaway
shops – in those days going to the segregated, lynch mob dominated South
— supported the minimum wage too.  Many large corporations, however,
fearful of the wave of activism that was expanding union strength
opposed New Deal social legislation as “creeping socialism,” and argued
that the “market” alone should dictate wages.

The pre-civil rights South was where reaction was strongest, its elite
leaders identifying Southern economic health with the region’s ability
to pay low wage.  Denying African Americans the franchise made it a
one-party region and gave Southern representatives disproportionate
power in Congress. Power they used to fight any federal measure that
implied equal treatment of black and white, thus at legislation aimed at
alleviating poverty. Typical was the comment by South Carolina Senator
Ed Smith:

“Any man on this floor who has sense enough to read the English language
knows that the main object of this bill is, by human legislation, to
overcome the splendid gift of God to the South.”

Translated into English, that meant defending the South’s comparative
advantage of forcing workers to live on substandard wages – forcing
workers, black and white to live on wages below those paid in the North.
 But the minimum wage had its supporters in that region too, as black
and white sharecroppers, tenant farmers, steel workers, and textile
workers organized, organizing that encouraged a small number of pro-New
Deal political leaders to step forward.  Outstanding amongst those in
1937 was a newly elected Florida Congressman who some may recall as
being, many years later, a leading defender of Social Security when
Ronald Reagan sought to undo it – Claude Pepper.

 

**THREE**

 

It was that combination of popular activism, civic engagement and
sympathetic government that helped bring a change of heart — or a change
of mind when seeing the writing on the wall, know social change was
unstoppable — to the then extremely conservative Supreme Court.  In
1937, the Court reversed its 1923 decision and in West Coast Hotel v.
Parrish upheld the right of the State of Washington to pass minimum wage
legislation – arguing that a law which benefits the community as a whole
did not violate the 14^th^ Amendment.  This opened up the door for the
FLSA – and it opened equally for all subsequent New Deal social
legislation creating the safety net we are now fighting to preserve. 
Because the political climate in the United States has turned since
Reagan’s election in 1980, with his and his successor’s attacks on
social welfare, with their attempt to return to the unrestricted
capitalism of the 1920s that gave us the Depression, today’s Supreme
Court has become a “worthy” successor to prior Courts that protected the
rights of property at the expense of popular rights.  Therefore it is
worthwhile to recall today the language of the West Coast Hotel v.
Parrish decision:

“Liberty safeguarded in law … requires …  protection … against the evils
which menace the health, safety, morals and welfare of the people.”

“The legislature was entitled to adopt measures to reduce the evils of
the ‘sweating system,’ the exploiting of workers at wages so low as to
be insufficient to meet the bare cost of living … The legislature had
the right to consider that its minimum wage requirements would be an
important aid in carrying out its policy of protection.

…

“There is an additional and compelling consideration which recent
economic experience has brought into a strong light.  The exploitation
of a class of workers who are in an unequal position with respect to
bargaining power and are thus relatively defenseless against the denial
of living wage is not only detrimental to their health and well being
but casts a direct burden for their support upon the community.  What
these workers lose in wages the taxpayers are called upon to pay.  The
bare cost of living must be met.”

Key to this language, which also facilitated subsequent civil
rights/Great Society legislation, was the assertion that ***“regulation
which is reasonable in relation to its subject and is adopted in the
interests of the community***,” could not be construed as a violation of
the 5^th^ and 14^th^ amendment.

Recent Supreme Courts have ignored that decision, conservative
majorities have issued rulings which have step by-step overturned any
standard that speaks to the interest of the community, thus undoing the
legal edifice for any social welfare measures.  The argument that
minimum wage hurts small business and leads to higher unemployment –
however specious it may be – is language which challenges any consensus
as to what is “in the interests of the community.”

 

**FOUR**

 

Attacks limited what Roosevelt and progressives/liberals in Congress
could do; the Bill that eventually passed was far from perfect – it
allowed employers two (or more) years to reach the new standards of a 40
cent minimum, 40 hour maximum.  Child labor was prohibited in
“interstate commerce,” but numerous exemptions and differentials were
allowed*.  **The importance of the FSLA, however, lay not in the
immediate gains but in the official recognition that working conditions
and standard of living were no longer only questions between employer
and employee – they were issues for society at large.***

And even though weak, it meant immediate pay raises for millions.  In
1937, 12 million workers in industries affecting interstate commerce
earned less than 40 cents per hour – no southern textile worker earned
that much, neither did New England shoe workers.   Moreover, it opened
up the possibility for changes in the years ahead.  After World War II
the ban on child labor was vastly extended.  Many wage/hour exemptions
were eliminated through the years too, especially with the law’s
expansion in 1961 when coverage was extended to large retail and service
enterprises, local transit, construction and gas service stations.   In
1966, FLSA’s protection was brought to state and local government
employees, to hospitals, nursing homes, schools, laundries, large
hotels, motels, restaurants, farms.  Subsequent amendments added
federal, state and local government workers who had remained excluded
and certain categories of domestic workers.

Minimum wage pay has generally been inadequate to fully meet the needs
of a full-time worker with a family.  Pressure, largely from organized
labor, has led to the amount being raised more than 20 times – \$1 per
hour first being attained in 1955.  The real minimum wage – adjusted for
inflation – reached its highest point in 1968.  Those increases also
helped maintain a connection between productivity levels and economic
growth, between 1947-1973, productivity rose by 104%, the minimum wage
rose by 101%.  Then came Nixon, Reagan, Bush Sr. and Jr. – the result:
between 1973 and 2004, productivity rose by 78%, the minimum wage fell
by 24% (non-supervisory workers wages fell by 11% during that period). 
Which brings us to the present and today’s initiatives in Maryland,
Washington DC, federally.

 

**FIVE**

Ultimately the importance of the minimum wage is as one of many means
needed to combat rampant poverty in our society.  The following quotes
by Martin Luther King and by Nelson Mandela serve as a reminder that no
measure of social justice should be weakened or left unmoved until all
have a decent standard of living, until substantive equality is
understood as a needed goal in and of itself.

Just a few days prior to his assassination in 1968, Martin Luther King
told workers in Memphis, Tennessee,

“It is criminal to have people working on a full-time basis … getting
part-time income.  We are tired of working our hands off and laboring
every day and not even making a wage adequate with daily basic
necessities of life.”

 

While in London in 2005, Nelson Mandela attended an anti-poverty rally
and said to those gathered there,

“Massive poverty and obscene inequality are such terrible scourges of
our times – times in which the world boasts breathtaking advances in
science, technology, industry and wealth accumulation – they have to
rank alongside slavery and apartheid as social evils.

“Like slavery and apartheid, poverty is not natural.  It is man-made and
it can be overcome and eradicated by the actions of human beings.

“And overcoming poverty is not a gesture of charity,  It is an act of
justice,  It is the protection of a fundamental human right, the right
to dignity and a decent life.”

** **

** **

**Sources**:

 

Irving Bernstein:

**The Lean Years: A History of the American Worker 1920-1933**, Penguin
Books, 1966 (1960)

 

Kim Bobo:

**Wage Theft in America**, The New Press, 2009

 

Eileen Boris & Nelson Lichtenstein (editors);

**Major Problems in the History of American Workers**, D.C. Heath and
Company, 1991

 

Lewis Corey:

**The Decline of American Capitalism**, Covici Friede Publishers, 1934

 

Foster Rhea Dulles & Melvyn Dubofsky:

**Labor in America: A History**, Harlan Davidson, 1993 (1949)

 

Steve Fraser:

**Labor Will Rule: Sidney Hillman and the Rise of American Labor**, The
Free Press, 1991

 

Michael Harrington:

**The Other America: Poverty in the United States**, Penguin Books 1969
(1962)

 

Richard D. Heffner:

**A Documentary History of the United States**, Mentor Books 1965 (1952)

 

 

Leo Huberman:

**We the People: The Drama of America**, Harper & Brothers, 1947  (1932)

 

William E. Leuchtenburg:

**Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal**, Harper Torchbooks, 1963

 

Holly Sklar and Rev. Dr. Paul Henry:

**A Just Minimum Wage: Good for Workers, Business and our Future**,
American Friends Service Committee and the National Council of Churches,
2005

 

Websites consulted:

 

AFL-CIO

Department of Labor

Economic Policy Institute

[*METRO-DC DSA ENDORSES SHALLAL, MENDELSON,
NORTON*](http://dsadc.org/metro-dc-dsa-endorses-shallal-mendelson-norton/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

Metro-DC Democratic Socialists of America, at its February 11 membership
meeting, endorsed Andy Shallal in the April 1 Democratic primary
election for D.C. mayor.  The organization also endorsed the re-election
bids of Phil Mendelson for chairman of the D.C. council and Eleanor
Holmes Norton for D.C. delegate to the House of Representatives. It made
no endorsements in other primary races.

Members supporting the endorsement of Shallal cited his outreach to the
progressive community and his support of social and economic justice, as
shown in his campaign platform.  Shallal’s fair treatment of his
employees as a business owner also was a factor in the endorsement, as
was his willingness to host events by progressive organizations at his
Busboys and Poets chain of restaurants.

The endorsement of Mendelson was based on his support for labor and
progressive causes over a long career as an at-large councilmember and
council chair.  Norton was cited for her support of progressive causes
in Congress and her effective advocacy of the District despite not
having a vote on the House floor.

Because of the closely contested nature of the mayor’s race, Metro-DC
DSA will focus its efforts on supporting Shallal.  Members interested in
helping DSA support Shallal should contact Bill Mosley at
[*billmosley@comcast.net*](mailto:billmosley@comcast.net).

[*Response to NSA’s Impacts on the Economy
Expand*](http://dsadc.org/response-to-nsas-impacts-on-the-economy-expand/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

*By Dan Adkins*

News continues to mount that the NSA’s spying is leading to increased
challenges to U.S. and U.S. corporate leadership in the internet.

German Chancellor Angela Merkel stated that she plans discussions with
France about building up European communication networks to avoid
snooping by the NSA.  She disapproves of companies like Facebook and
Google storing data in countries with less-secure services while doing
business with more secure European countries.  The European network will
avoid sending e-mail across the Atlantic unnecessarily and thus avoiding
NSA.  France is agreeing to the chancellor’s proposals.

Some Europeans are pushing for U.S. influence over internet leadership
to be lessened and shared, although the push is not to place them under
U.N. control which could lead to less internet freedom, given the
influence of less-democratic countries.

NSA received information from the Australian intelligence service
scanning a U.S. law firm representing Indonesia in a trade dispute.  It
is not clear how that information was used.

Another criticism is that journalists may now find it increasingly
difficult-to-impossible to keep sources secret.

New products are emerging from secure cell phones, apps that route your
web searches through other countries, and techniques to keep your phone
and credit cards secure in public (aluminum foil in your wallet).

A contributing factor to government leaks is the intelligence
conglomerate’s response to 9-11 failures.  The failure to stop 9-11 was
partly due to the lack of intelligence sharing between agencies.  The
failure was to be solved by more sharing and increased surveillance.  It
seems that the extreme surveillance efforts may have appalled some new
employees.

A political repercussion to NSA’s unwelcome visibility may be that
Silicon Valley companies and billionaires are funding a challenge to a
Democratic Congressman incumbent who supports the industry and poor
people.  The aim is replace him with another Democrat more focused with
the valley’s industry needs.  Traditionally Silicon Valley has been more
hands-off with Washington, but that has changed.

[*Thirty-three Years and Counting Mumia Abu-Jamal and the Struggle for
Freedom*](http://dsadc.org/thirty-three-years-and-counting-mumia-abu-jamal-and-the-struggle-for-freedom/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

*by Kurt Stand*

**The Case**

Thirty-three years is a long-time in anyone’s life: children grow,
parents pass; stores open and close; new technologies appear while older
ones vanish.  Thirty-three years is a period of time that changes
neighborhoods and cities, social changes unnoticeable at the onset can
create “new normals” that seem to have always been in place.  To say
that 33 years is a third of a life is optimistic, most of us will not be
around to celebrate a 99^th^ birthday. Thirty-three years is the length
of time that Mumia Abu-Jamal has been behind bars.

On January 29^th^, the Institute for Policy Studies showed the film
*Justice on Trial: The Case of Mumia Abu-Jamal –* a documentary that
tells the circumstances that led to a fatal shooting of Philadelphia
police officer Daniel Faulkner in 1981 and of the wounding, arrest,
conviction and imprisonment of Mumia Abu-Jamal.   And it tells of his
struggle for freedom.  That struggle has taken place against the
backdrop of a determined effort by Faulkner’s widow, members of the
Philadelphia police department and members of the Pennsylvania political
establishment to see Mumia executed – a threat that only ended in 2010
(as the film was being made) when a court ruling definitively took him
off death row, but did not reverse his conviction.  Instead, he remains
in a state prison, serving a life sentence.

Neither Mumia’s arrest – and the divide between those who want him free
and those who want him dead — can be understood in isolation from our
recent past; a past the film attempts to depict.  This begins with the
radicalization of the Black freedom movement in the late 1960s as the
civil rights movement ran into an impassable wall when it attempted to
join economic equality with the gains being made toward legal equality. 
The rampant poverty and police violence that prevailed in the black
community made the need for substantive equality especially clear in
urban ghettos.  Out of those circumstances, the Black Panther Party
emerged and found a base of support by attempting to fuse community
self-defense with neighborhood programs to provide food, health care and
education to those who were being denied.  It was a combination that
inspired fear and hatred amongst those in power, those who were used to
having their commands obeyed – a hatred Mumia experienced first hand in
his early teens when participating in a peaceful protest by black
students violently attacked by police.  Anger at injustice and hope that
a better alternative future was possible led him to join the Panthers. 
But their existence was brief as state-sanctioned repression destroyed
the organization from within and without.  Such repression was
particularly fierce in Philadelphia where the police department
epitomized a belief in order over law, power over justice.

Riding the crest of the wave was Frank Rizzo, police chief who was later
elected Mayor based on his appeal to racist fear amongst white working
people who saw their world in decline and didn’t know where else to
point their finger. And it was based on the supposed success of his
“toughness” and brutal methods.  Rizzo was amongst those who epitomized
the return of the right, a pattern replicated throughout the country and
nationally with Ronald Reagan’s election as President in 1980.  Reagan’s
victory meant the demise of the hopes that gave birth to civil rights
and peace movements, of labor insurgencies and movements of the urban
poor, of the hopes of the New Left and of aspirations for a
revolutionary change.  Many of those willing to give-in decided to
advocate a more piecemeal process of reform, while others sought to
begin radical change by a turn inward — the path taken in Philadelphia’s
black community by Operation Move.  Mumia was attracted to the movement
and, already a journalist, reported on its growth and activities and on
the violent attack which left many of its members dead or in prison,
with a city block bombed under orders by local government.

 

**The Context**

Membership in the Panthers and sympathy with Move were sufficient reason
for Philadelphia’s police to hate Mumia, that he was a journalist able
and willing to expose official corruption was reason all the more.  A
symbol of what they hated, his presence when Faulkner was shot was
sufficient by itself to set in motion a chain of events that could not
be stopped.  The film documents judicial bias, evidence tampering (and
ignoring evidence discovered), jury selection racism as part of a
process of a prejudicial process that marked every step of the process
through to Mumia’s trial.  His lawyers have presented evidence of bias
and misconduct during his repeated appeals, but none of that has
mattered in a criminal justice system designed to keep appeals from
going forward rather than resolve them in the interest of justice.

Moreover details mattered little for Mumia was convicted more as a
symbol than as an individual.  That transference is made obvious by the
fury with which Faulkner’s widow and the local police, made vivid on
screen, reject any evidence that the wrong man may have been convicted. 
Logic might indicate the opposite, as the aggrieved party should want  –
more than anything else – to punish the person who “did it,” and thus be
absolutely positive that the person convicted is in fact the guilty
party.  But Mumia fit the bill as to all they oppose and thus his
finding of guilt is far more important than any concern for the truth.
 And so he remains in prison.

He remains there in part because his legal options are narrow, narrow
because of changes in defendant rights that have been steadily narrowed
from Richard Nixon’s days in office.  That narrowing occurred as a
response by the government to the success of many to use the court
system in the 1960s and early 70s to defend civil liberties.  And that
narrowing took place because the left-wing movement for radical change
out of which Mumia’s politics first emerged was weakened nationally and
globally – the fate of the Black Panther Party an example of repression
that took numerous shapes and forms.  A sense of what has been lost can
be seen when viewing *Free Angela and All Political Prisoners*, a
documentary made last year about the arrest and imprisonment of Angela
Davis in 1971and about the building of a movement that resulted in her
acquittal by an all white jury on charges of murder, kidnapping and
conspiracy in 1972 – even after then President Nixon assured the country
of her guilt.

First publicly attacked by then Governor Ronald Reagan when she was
fired from her university teaching position because of her Communist
Party membership, Angela’s academic skills, radicalism (a term she
beautifully defines in the movie), support for the Panthers and for the
“Soledad Brothers” – three politicized state prison inmates falsely
accused of murder – made her a particular target, hated all the more by
those who felt threatened by societal changes then underway because she
was all this and a black woman.  The film depicts the violent repression
against those struggling for liberation that Mumia also experienced –
but it depicts too a powerful movement for peace, freedom, justice and
equality in the US and abroad able to change the terms of debate, able
to change the political and legal atmosphere so that her liberation –
and that of other falsely accused political prisoners – was possible.

Many of the reforms and social changes gains made in those years have
taken hold and have helped change society for the better.  But much has
been lost too, for in the years since, political space for openly
radical politics has been lost, weakening the ground for democratic
action in any direction.  With socialist ideology and left-wing
organization undermined alongside the weakening working-class
organization in all of its forms, numerous limitations have been placed
on legal rights.  The rights of labor, the public rights of communities,
the rights of those caught up in the criminal justice system have all
been restricted to an extent impossible to imagine in 1971.  As a result
our public education system is part privatized, divided and ever more
unequal, so our unions represent a smaller percentage of the workforce
than almost any country in the world, and so we have by far the highest
rate of imprisonment, with 2.3 million (60% black or Latino) in prison
or jail, millions more on parole or probation.  Political prisoners,
once able to find arenas for contestation as the brilliant legal defense
Angela Davis’ team put forward exemplifies, can no longer be implemented
as one legal avenue after another blocked.  Thus Mumia remains locked
up.

Yet so too resistance continues.  Angela Davis under harsh conditions
and imminent threat found a way to create a space for herself, to
continue to think, write, struggle and live – space shared with family,
friends, solidarity movements, and through the holding on to feelings
prison often denies.  So too with Mumia who reminds us in *Justice on
Trial* that he is not just a political figure, a symbol in the fight for
justice, but also a human being who yearns to enjoy the warmth of life. 
Interviews with his sister help complete the picture, giving a personal
dimension without which his politics, and his strength of will are
impossible to understand.  A will that has enabled him to remain active
and engaged during all his years on death row, that enables him to
continue to speak out today.

And so the campaign for his freedom remains alive and important.  At the
conclusion of the showing Johanna Fernandez, the film’s producer, talked
to the audience at IPS through Skype.  She explained that although there
are no more grounds for appeal, other possibilities for action remain,
which is part of the reason this 2010 film is being re-distributed. 
President Obama recently appointed Debo Adegbile to head the Civil
Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice – a fortuitous
appointment, as Adegbile is familiar with Mumia’s case having taken part
in the post-sentencing legal briefs that successfully challenged the
constitutionality of his death sentence.  As the film notes, the
officers in the Philadelphia police department have been cited numerous
times for corruption, brutality and racism.  Therefore the campaign is
today focused on Washington DC and building public demand for the
Justice Department to launch an investigation of Philadelphia.  If the
city is found guilty of systemic rights violations, it may be possible
to have Mumia’s case re-opened, may be possible to win his freedom.

 

**The Future**

And it may be possible to regain space in which far seeing visions of
what society could be again gain political relevance.  Mumia and Angela
have co-authored an essay that puts forward a vision and a politics of
future without the injustices that define our present.  To understand
what the campaign for his freedom means it is important to grasp the
meaning of the ‘abolition democracy” they envision in the following
excerpt:

Social structures—courts, police, prisons, etc.—have within them a deep
bias about what constitutes crime and what does not. Any social
structure is a product of its previous historical, economic and social
iterations, and these previous forms bear significant influence on later
forms. The present system, in addition to being increasingly repressive,
is the logical inheritance of its racist, hierarchical, exploitative
past, and it is also a reactive formation to attempts to transform,
democratize, and socialize it.

 

For authentic democracy to emerge, “abolition democracy” must be
enacted—the abolition of institutions that advance the dominance of any
one group over any other. It is the democracy that is possible if we
continue the legacy of the great abolition movements in American
history, those that opposed slavery, lynching, and segregation. As long
as the prison-industrial-complex remains, American democracy will
continue to be a false one. Such a false democracy reduces people and
their communities to the barest biological subsistence because it pushes
them outside the law and the polity.

 

The idea of abolition democracy comes from a reading of U.S. history
where the freedom struggle is central to who Americans are and to why we
are who we are. We are less exemplars of legendary “founding fathers”
than we are of “founding freedom fighters”—inheritors of those who
fought for their freedom, not from a British aristocracy, but from
American slavocracy.

 

We need to prepare not only a critique of a repressive, incarceral
*status quo,* but a vision of a new, enlightened, more human, more
socialized view of a future without mass incarceration.

 

 

Quote:

“Alternatives to the Present System of Capitalist Injustice,” by Mumia
Abu-Jamal and Angela Y. Davis, from *Imagine Living in a Socialist USA*,
edited by Frances Goldin, Michael Smith and Debby Smith (Harper Collins,
2014).  The article was posted January 20, 2014 on
http//thefeministwire.com/2014/01/

Films:

*Justice on Trial; The Case of Mumia Abu-Jamal*, directed by Kouross
Esmaeli, produced by Johanna Fernandez, 2010.

*Free Angela Davis and All Political Prisoners*, directed by Shola
Lynch, produced by actor Jada Pinkett Smith, 2013.

Further Information:

Campaign to Bring Mumia Home —
*www.sparrowmedia.net/2014/01/**mumia**-abu-jamal-debo-adigbele/*‎

[*Treatment of Federal Employees Could Hurt Future Government
Workforce*](http://dsadc.org/treatment-of-federal-employees-could-hurt-future-government-workforce/)

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

I recently retired after 31 years of service with the federal
government.  During the final year alone I witnessed the
across-the-board budget cuts known as “sequestration” that led to many
employees being furloughed without pay, last October’s16-day government
shutdown, and the third year of a federal pay freeze.  These and other
actions (or inactions) by the elected leadership of the government
communicate, in no uncertain terms, that civil servants are viewed as
something less than valued members of the federal community.

Nevertheless, today’s feds have it good compared to those yet to be
hired.  Future workers will have to contribute more than five times as
much of their salaries to their retirement compared to current workers –
amounting, in effect, to a steep pay cut. Some members of Congress also
are threatening to eliminate federal pensions for future employees
altogether, which would leave them only with Social Security and their
savings to see them through their golden years.

Some elected officials have expressed sympathy with the civil servants’
plight.  Sen. Barbara Mikulski of Maryland, for instance, noted that
federal employees “have been the targets of unending attacks.  They’ve
been furloughed, laid off and locked out through no fault of their own.”

To be sure, it’s congressional Republicans who have been the principal
instigators of the attacks on federal workers, while President Obama and
many Democrats in Congress have spoken up in favor of their employees. 
Yet for the past several years, the defenders of federal employees have
retreated while fed-bashers have been on the march.

Elected officials who demean their employees, freeze their pay, threaten
their retirement earnings and label them as “non-essential” have to ask
themselves:  How will this affect the federal workforce over the long
term?

I could have asked myself a similar question when I first went to the
work for the government in 1982.  While many of my peers were
gravitating to high-paying jobs in the corporate sector, I viewed
working for the federal government as an honorable way to serve the
public while earning a decent salary and benefits, if not in the same
league as my classmates who became corporate lawyers.  Yet President
Reagan had just fired the air traffic controllers for striking, federal
employees were subject to “reductions in force” (a polite term for
“firings”), and in general the treatment of civil servants was at a low
point.  But they fared somewhat better during the George H.W. Bush and
Clinton administrations, and federal service became a more attractive
career option for many.  After the 9/11 attacks and the nationwide
mobilization of the war against terror, elected officials seemed to gain
a new appreciation for the value of a dedicated, highly motivated
federal workforce.  However, the anti-government Tea Party’s success in
the 2010 congressional election put fed-bashing back on the agenda.

According to the Government Accountability Office, about 30 percent of
federal workers will be eligible to retire by 2016.  Even before the
most recent attacks on federal workers, experts were predicting a
federal “retirement tsunami” in the near future.  What incentive,
besides economic necessity, would keep them working in this atmosphere? 
If the attacks on feds convince more veteran employees to retire than
usual, agencies could suffer serious gaps in experience and
institutional memory.

Although the economy is said to be recovering, there are still more job
seekers than available jobs, and few federal vacancies will be lacking
applicants for the foreseeable future.  But what will happen when the
economy is booming, as it was in the late 1990s?  Will the government be
able to compete for the best-qualified, most highly motivated
applicants?  Or will it become an employer of last resort, having to
accept second-tier hires while the blue-chip candidates opt for
higher-paying private-sector jobs? Stories in the media have chronicled
how attacks on the civil service have made recent college graduates
reluctant to seek government careers, or driven current federal workers
to private-sector jobs.  In many professional fields — such as law, the
sciences and information technology — federal pay can’t compete with the
private sector but has traditionally compensated with good benefits and
the satisfaction of serving the public.  If you take these away, why
would anyone choose a government career?

Do members of Congress want less-qualified, less-motivated workers
inspecting their constituents’ food, controlling their flights and
ensuring the safety of their drinking water? For some – if they were
truthful – the answer would be “yes.”  The attacks on federal workers
are part of the larger conservative effort to undercut and devalue the
role of government in society, of which the sequester and the shutdown
were only the latest chapters.

A shrunken, demoralized, less-qualified, less-motivated federal
workforce will lead to a government even less able to serve the public
and act as a check on runaway corporate abuses.  The botched rollout of
the Affordable Care Act was both a result of and further contribution to
this degradation of government.  The inability of the government to set
up the ACA on its own led to the hiring of an unqualified contractor;
and the contractor’s failure has invited more attacks on the
government’s competence to administer complex domestic programs.  The
right does its best to ignore federal programs that have worked well,
such as Social Security and Medicare, when backed by adequate resources
and broad public support.

It doesn’t have to be this way.  Government again can become the first
choice for the best and brightest – but only if outrage over the attacks
on government itself forces conservatives to back off.  Only then will
federal employees find themselves treated with respect rather than
contempt.
