***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from November 2012 Issue**

**Archived November 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Environmental Movement’s “Ultimate Insider” Denounces Bankruptcy of
U.S.
Capitalism*](http://dsadc.org/environmental-movements-ultimate-insider-denounces-bankruptcy-of-u-s-capitalism/)

Friday, November 2nd, 2012

By Andy Feeney

One of the most respected political insiders in the American
environmental movement has declared the bankruptcy of “America’s
ruthless brand of capitalism.”  At a book signing at AFL-CIO
headquarters in Washington on Sept. 19, James Augustus or “Gus” Speth
urged environmentalists to join with other progressive groups to form a
unifed national movement to replace the system over the next four
decades, adding that while a better America is possible, “we don’t have
much time left.”

Speth, an environmental attorney, is the founder of the environmental
think tank the World Resources Institute (WRI) and a cofounder of the
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), as well as a former director
of the United Nations Development Programme and an environmental advisor
to the Carter White House.  Now teaching environmental law at the
University of Vermont Law School, he has recently served as dean of the
prestigious Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, and has
also served as a trustee of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund — presumably a
somewhat capitalist enterprise.

Yet in his new book “America the Possible:  Manifesto for a New
Economy,” Speth states that the U.S. today faces an “overwhelming,
colliding collection of problems” that stems from “fundamental flaws in
our economic and political system.”  And while Speth’s book lays
emphasis on the environmental dimension of those problems, and
particularly our political system’s apparent inability to address the
problem of climate change, he also stresses the dangers of high and
increasing levels of economic inequality, extensive child poverty, and a
practice of mass incarceration — particularly of black men — that has
given the US the world’s largest prison population, both absolutely and
as a percentage of the population.

In addition, “America the Possible” notes that the U.S. currently
suffers from the highest infant mortality rate in the developed
industrial world, the second highest school dropout rate, the highest
rate of homicide, and the world’s highest rate of spending on wars and
the military.

To cure this daunting list of national maladies, Speth in “America the
Possible” indicates that environmental groups as well as other
progressive forces need to put together a compelling vision of an
alternative political and economic future that will break decisively
with our “virulent, fast-growing strain of corporate-consumerist
capitalism.”

The alternate vision will initially seem politically unrealistic to most
Americans, Speth acknowledges.  Yet as a corporate-dominated American
economy and political system suffer from a series of crises in coming
decades, the existing system will lose political legitimacy in the eyes
of millions of people, and “progressives of all stripes” will have a
chance to force through systemic change by joining in a unified movement
for national transformation, despite “fierce and determined resistance”
by supporters of the corporate status quo.

Although praising the civil disobedience practiced by the Occupy
movement, Speth in his book and in his talk at the AFL-CIO building in
September has not focused on change coming through some kind of
insurrection, but through a strategy of interlocking and mutually
reinforcing transformations in key features of the existing system,
beginning with a coordinated mass effort to democratize the nation’s
corporate-dominated politics.  Transformation also will rest heavily on
an ongoing “bottom-up” effort to establish new economic institutions at
the local level, both as alternatives to corporate economic rule and as
models of what a future democratic society might look like.

According to “America the Possible,” the transformed economy of the
future will not be “classic socialism,” but at the same time it will not
be our existing capitalism, either.  From his remarks at the AFL-CIO
building and in the pages of the book, Speth seems to favor a highly
modified market society combining some features of Swedish social
democracy with a “no growth” or “post growth” economics such as that
advocated by Dr. Herman Daly of the University of Maryland and the
“small is beautiful” economic theories of the late E.F. Schumacher.

“America the Possible” also cites Gar Alperovitz, whose book “America
Beyond Capitalism” envisions corporate capitalism gradually being
displaced and supplanted by a spreading market network of cooperatives,
worker-owned enterprises, nonprofit businesses, community development
programs and “hybrid” businesses combining social objectives with the
pursuit of profit.

To combat corporate power at the national and international levels,
Speth also recommends a system of “stakeholder representation” somewhat
resembling the labor co-determination system in Germany that places
labor representatives on corporate boards.  Another recommendation is
that progressives fight to replace the state chartering of large
corporations with federal corporate chartering, as recommended by Teddy
Roosevelt during the Progressive Era and as recently endorsed by Ralph
Nader.

To address the chronic economic insecurities, widespread poverty and
high unemployment rates affecting millions of Americans today, Speth’s
book calls for a “new war on poverty,” although he offers few details on
how it might be fought.  He also argues for the federal government’s
serving as “employer of the last resort” for the unemployed, possibly
through tax incentives to corporations for new hiring but possibly
through direct federal employment.  Along with radical economist Juliet
Schor, he also calls for a less growth-addicted economy in the future to
address unemployment through a mixed program of shorter work weeks,
increasing government expenditures on unmet social needs and the
building of a new culture less devoted to consumerism, less influenced
by advertising, and more devoted to leisure time, community, and the
quality of life.

For some democratic socialists, both inside and outside of DSA,
particular elements of Speth’s economic vision will likely seem
problematic.  For example, “America the Possible” points with alarm to
large federal deficits and the growing U.S. national debt.  Unlike the
Tea Party, Speth clearly wants to reduce the deficits and shrink the
debt through cuts in bloated military programs and higher taxes on the
rich, and his book advocates an increase in social spending on the poor
and economically insecure, not Republican-style austerity.

On the other hand, despite short and favorable quotations from Keynes
and the liberal Keynsian economists Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz,
“America the Possible” seems to rule out Krugman’s vision of curing the
current business slump through a massive increase in deficit spending. 
Perhaps equally importantly, Speth’s vision of long-term economic
transformation through the evolutionary growth of co-ops, worker-owned
enterprises and small green businesses — while compatible with Gar
Alperovitz’s radical vision in “American Beyond Capitalism” — is likely
to be economic anathema to some pragmatic and business-minded leaders of
the labor movement.

What democratic socialists should find striking and important in Speth’s
book and economic vision, however, is the emphasis he puts on mainstream
environmental groups moving beyond their focus on “environmental” issues
alone, and his call — whether or not his ideas can be achieved — for all
liberal and progressive movements to join together in supporting one
another’s issues as they work for system-transforming change.

Cosponsoring Speth’s speech in September was a coalition of some 15
organizations, not only including the NRDC and some other leading
environmental organizations, but also the AFL-CIO itself, Jobs with
Justice, and the Labor Network for Sustainability.

Other cosponsors of the event included the Institute for Policy Studies
(IPS), whose president John Cavanagh introduced Speth;,  climate
activist Bill McKibben’s [*350.org*](http://350.org/); Friends of the
Earth – U.S.; the Worldwatch Institute; Yes Magazine; Teaching for
Change bookstore; the Center for a New American Dream, the Communitarian
Network; and a coalition called the New Economy Working Group, which
currently works out of IPS.

Other partial endorsers of Speth’s vision, judging from the
favorable blurbs on the dust cover of “America the Possible,” include
Alperovitz, environmental writer David Orr, William Greider of The
Nation magazine and radical journalist Naomi Klein, author of “The Shock
Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism.”

Whether this range of endorsers indicates that Speth’s unified
progressive movement is already beginning to take shape on a small scale
is probably impossible to tell at this stage in American history.

Yet for democratic socialists and other progressives who have deep
reservations about the viability of capitalism, and have long advocated
the formation of a multi-issue leftwing movement to replace it, the
publication of “American the Possible” is a surprisingly hopeful sign.

“America the Possible:  Manifesto for a New Economy” was published this
year by Yale University Press.   The list price excluding sales tax is
\$30, and the book is available from Teach for Change at Busboys and
Poets, as well as from commercial bookstores such as Kramerbooks at
Dupont Circle.

[*Michael Harrington and “The Other America” subject of documentary
showing Nov.
8*](http://dsadc.org/michael-harrington-and-the-other-america-subject-of-documentary-showing-nov-8/)

Friday, November 2nd, 2012

DC DSA joins in the Nov. 8 presentation of a remarkable documentary
film, “Michael Harrington and Today’s Other America: Corporate Power and
Inequality.” The film will be shown at **Georgetown University’s McNeir
Auditorium  at 7 p.m.**, with discussion by *Washington Post* columnist
and *American Prospect* editor-at-large Harold Meyerson (who is a DSA
vice chair) and socialist feminist scholar Heidi Hartmann.

The course of the debate on poverty and inequality since Harrington’s
1962 book *The Other America* caught the attention of Kennedy
administration has been rocky. Meyerson, in an *American Prospect*
article earlier in 2012, said the “war on poverty” was as often in
retreat as advancing under a capitalist counterattack, “a relentlessly
destabilizing system that, if not sufficiently checked by democratic
popular power, would seek to diminish workers’ earnings and influence in
its continual quest for profits and control. The New Deal, Harrington
believed, could be repealed.”

The event is jointly sponsored by Metro DC DSA and Georgetown’s
Kalmanovitz Initiative for Labor and the Working Poor, headed by Prof.
Joseph McCartin, and by Dissent magazine.

“It is fitting,” McCartin told *The Washington Socialist, “* that we
remember Harrington’s challenge to America’s moral complacency about
poverty at this moment, when inequality is soaring.  It is appropriate
that we recommit ourselves to alleviating the poverty that still
afflicts far too many in this nation and around the world.” The film
showing is the first of two programs on poverty planned by the
Kalmanovitz Initiative. Longtime antipoverty advocate Peter Edelman will
talk November 15, at 5:30 p.m., in Georgetown’s Riggs Library (for more
information see the Kalmanovitz Initiative
[*website*](http://lwp.georgetown.edu))

***A New Hope for the Left in Puerto Rico***

Wednesday, November 14th, 2012

By Jose Gutierrez\
Washington Socialist election extra

The island of Puerto Rico has been under the control of the United
States since the Spanish-American War of 1898. The island has more than
3.7 million inhabitants. The capital, San Juan, has more than 395,000
residents .Although Puerto Ricans are US citizens they are also, in
cultural and sociological terms a distinct nationality, much like Scots
within the United Kingdom or the Basque and Catalans within Spain.

Elections were held on Nov. 6 for the the local governor, the island
legislature and the municipal governments of Puerto Rico. The incumbent
governor, Luis Fortuno, the first Republican to be elected to that
position since 1972, lost his re-election  campaign. The governor had
imposed a neoliberal agenda that was resisted by the people of Puerto
Rico and his party will be replaced in office by the more moderate
Popular Democratic Party (PDP).

The PDP is similar to the Democratic Party of the mainland US but not
identical. Like the mainland Democratic Party it has a moderate to
conservative wing and a liberal wing. The new governor comes from the
moderate wing but the person who is the hope of progressives in Puerto
Rico is the woman who will be the mayor of the capital city, Carmen
Yulin.

Carmen Yulin, a single mother who was given the best score on civil
liberties by the ACLU of any politician in the island, was a member of
the Puerto Rico House of Representatives before running for mayor. She
is an advocate of LGBT rights. As a legislator and candidate for mayor
she also raised the issue of violence against women.

With a policy of building alliances with progressives, community
activists, unions and politicians from smaller third parties, the
Popular Democratic Party candidate, Carmen Yulin, defeated the incumbent
mayor and shocked the island establishment.

Yulin had to face a strong mayor with a well-established political
machine who had been in office for 12 years.

Tito Otero, an experienced community organizer and social activist, was
in charge of coordinating collaborative agreements with the LGBT
community and with community organizers from marginalized, low-income
communities and leaders from public housing projects.

Yulin also made agreements with the Puerto Rican Workers Union (SPT) and
General Union of Workers (UGT). She has stated that she supports the
right of city employees to unionize.

Yulin also supports the proposals by the Cruz Foundation for a Better
Country, an organization that includes social and trade union sectors
and advocates environmental causes, education and health.

The unions had to go to the federal Court of Appeals in Boston to have
the right of unions to financially support political candidates in
Puerto Rico recognized. The Republican island government had passed two
bills, Law 45 and the Campaign Finance Act of 2011, which prohibited
union donations to candidates.

Many activists think that Yulin’s campaign could have implications
beyond San Juan and can project this new way of governing beyond the
capitol.

***Cinema for Socialists***

Wednesday, November 14th, 2012

**By Daniel Adkins**

***Life over disability: The Sessions* (R, 95 min.)\
**\
Generally a movie about a 38-year old virgin (Mark O’Brian) trying to
lose his virginity would more likely be a weak comedy than a drama.
Since the script is an autobiography by a UC Berkeley journalist/poet
one might think it would be at least well written. You would be right.
Finding out that the man involved has a body ravaged by polio so that he
can only move his head and can only breath outside his iron lung for a
few hours at a time, one wonders how this could possibly be based on
actual events. It is. The icing on the cake is that Mark’s priest
counseled him in this effort. The priest believed Jesus would forgive
him for this sin. The film is obviously a drama but Mark O’Brien’s sense
of humor is so magnificent that you may remember it as a comedy.

This film should be out shortly. It was bought for distribution at the
Sundance Film Festival for \$6 million and I have already seen the
adverts on TV. For more information Google Mark O’Brian.

***A Royal Affair* (R, 137 min.)**

A Royal Affair (Danish: *En kongelig affære*) is a dramatization of a
period of Danish history of the last half of the 18th century. The film
roughly parallels the impact of the Enlightenment on the Danish court as
a young English princess is wed to become the Danish Queen. Her king is
insane or pretends to be insane to deal with a powerful court that has
among other things banned all books of the Enlightenment. Into this mix
comes a doctor who is secretly a pamphleteer for enlightenment. The king
chooses him to be the court’s physician since the doctor sees nothing
wrong with the king’s habit of visiting the red light district. Given
this beginning, political intrigue and romance soon follow, but the full
story is not always pretty.

Progressive views of history often focus on the role of popular
movements. This film shows no such movement but does document how
Denmark was held back by a system of serfdom which let the landowners be
judge, jury, and executioner of their own serfs. The film also shows the
court oblivious to the needs of anything but their own wealth. This 1%
relied on the ignorance and powerlessness of the people and a weak king.

The film was produced with the aid of Denmark, Sweden, and the Czech
Republic. The film is beautifully shot and well acted. It has been
selected as the Danish entry for the Best Foreign Language Oscar at the
85th Academy Awards. Do check out Danish history and the film in
Wikipedia for more information.

For more info see Wikipedia and
[*http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1276419/*](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1276419/)

***DC Voters Put Ethics First***

Wednesday, November 14th, 2012

By Bill Mosley\
Washington Socialist election extra

DC voters turned out heavily to vote on Nov. 6, many waiting in long
lines to cast their ballots, undoubtedly eager to help President Obama
win re-election by nailing down the District’s critical three electoral
votes.    It was a good thing they did; otherwise the 91.4 percent of
the District’s vote that Obama secured could have slipped embarrassingly
into the upper 80s.

But when it came to local races, the ethics of DC officeholders were on
the minds of voters as much as more traditional concerns such as public
safety, the economy or the effort to win greater independence from
congressional oversight.  This was not surprising, given that within
just the past year two members of the DC Council were convicted of
felonies, and other elected officials, including Mayor Vince Gray, have
come under investigation for alleged misdeeds.

On election day, voters overwhelmingly approved three amendments to the
DC Charter intended to punish future misbehavior by elected officials,
and turned out of office one incumbent – At-Large Councilmember Michael 
A. Brown – who, while as yet charged with no crime, has been the subject
of a spate of negative news reports indicating possible ethical lapses
or, at best, a lack of competence.  The appeal of David Grosso, who
ousted Brown, was less his platform than his newcomer’s lack of baggage.

One of the ballot items would enable a five-sixths vote of the Council
to expel a member for “gross misconduct.”  Today, the only way to remove
a sitting councilmember is through a recall election, which in the
District’s 38-year history of home rule has never happened.   The other
measures would result in the removal of a mayor or councilmember from
office if they committed a felony and bar them from holding the office
again.  Voters supported the ban-a-felon amendments even though there
was confusion – even among the DC councilmembers who proposed them –
over whether members would be banned for life or only for the duration
of their term, or whether the laws would even hold up in court if
challenged.

Nevertheless, with the recent convictions of former Council Chair Kwame
Brown and former Ward 5 Councilmember Harry Thomas Jr. (Brown on charges
related to campaign finance and falsified loan applications, Thomas for
stealing DC funds intended for charity), Mayor Gray being investigated
for an off-the-books “shadow” campaign, and questionable behavior by
other officeholders, voters were more than ready to punish what they saw
as bad behavior.  Michael A. Brown, in particular – who was one of the
Council’s more progressive members and the most outspoken in support of
DC statehood – saw his reputation tarnished by the mysterious
disappearance of \$113,000 in campaign funds, late payment of taxes and
rents, and his role in pushing through a bill to allow online gambling
in the District.  The gambling bill, which was adopted without a hearing
and virtually no public scrutiny, was later repealed.

                The District’s enemies in Congress have been quick to
pounce on DC officials’ ethical lapses, charging – as they have often
done in the past – that this proves the District isn’t worthy of even
the current limited home rule, much less expanded autonomy.  Of course,
they ignore the more than two decades (following former Mayor Marion
Barry’s drug arrest in 1990) of virtually scandal-free government in the
District – a period when, for instance, it was standard practice for
governors of Illinois to head directly to prison after leaving office.  
Clearly, the desire of some members of Congress to retain firm control
over DC is independent of the behavior of the District government – and
to deny full democratic rights to 600,000 U.S. citizens because of the
misbehavior of a handful of elected officials is un-American in the
extreme.  Nevertheless, if Congress was waiting for DC voters to express
their willingness to ride herd on their officeholders’ behavior as a
precondition of granting greater autonomy to the District, this election
sent that message loudly and clearly.

\*  \*  \*  \*

On a happier note, DSA members can be pleased that Phil Mendelson, one
of the Council’s most progressive and pro-labor members since taking
office in 1998, was overwhelmingly elected council chair.  Mendelson
inherited Kwame Brown’s chairmanship on a temporary basis when the
latter resigned, and now holds the seat in his own right.  The rest of
the local races in deep-blue DC involved incumbent Democrats facing no
serious opposition.

***Horst Brand, 1919–2012***

Friday, November 2nd, 2012

By Bill Mosley

Horst Brand, a longtime local DSA member who was a co-founder and editor
of *Dissent* and a frequent contributor the magazine, died last August
25 at the age of 92.

As recently as the 1990s, Brand, a resident of Silver Spring, was an
active member of the Metro DC DSA local.  He was involved in helping
plan the local’s public events and organized a reading group on topics
relevant to socialism.

Brand fled Frankfurt, Germany and Nazism in 1938 to come to the United
States.  He served in the U.S. army in World War II and married his
wife, Ruth, in 1944. After the war he studied at City College of New
York and then New York University, after which he worked for the Bureau
of Labor Statistics in Washington while also becoming involved in
socialist politics.  According to Michael Walzer, writing in *Dissent,*
Brand became allied with the “ideologically creative” strand of
socialism associated with Max Shachtman and wrote for the Shachtmanite
magazine *Labor Action*, which was edited by Irving Howe.  After “many
ideological arguments” Brand worked with Howe to found *Dissent*.  Both
Brand and Howe later became DSA members.

Horst Brand brought to DSA an intimate knowledge of labor issues and a
deep appreciation for socialism’s intellectual and internationalist
heritage.  He will be missed.

***Marylanders go for same-sex marriage, “Dream Act,” gambling and
gerrymandering***

Wednesday, November 14th, 2012

**by Carolyn Byerly\
Washington Socialist election extra**

**Same-sex marriage legalized**\
Maryland voters approved the same-sex marriage law on Nov. 6, joining
the states of Maine, Washington and Minnesota in passing similar
measures that same day.  It was a long-awaited moment here in Maryland,
where members of the state assembly had considered bills on same-sex
marriage for several consecutive years.  The bill only passed last year
because sponsors accepted a provision requiring a citizens’ referendum.
 Governor Martin O’Malley had made same-sex marriage one of several
issues he championed this election season.  He helped to raise the
millions of dollars equality advocates needed by bringing actor Josh
Charles and other celebrities on board as donors and spokespeople.

The advertising that this fundraising supported enabled, for example,
that wonderful TV spot by Julian Bond talking about the same-sex
marriage issue as one of civil rights.  By contrast, the anti-equality
forces’ publicity looked thin and outdated.  I am reminded of walking
from my car to the polling place on the morning of Nov. 6 and being
accosted by a middle aged woman offering me a flyer and saying “Please
consider voting no on Question 6”  I looked at her and said, “I’m a
lesbian in a 28-year relationship – why should I?”  She was startled and
didn’t have an answer. In the end, I think those who opposed the law had
no real grounds and, like the woman who accosted me, no real answers to
offset the logical reasons that equality advocates had so carefully
advanced.

In passing the same-sex marriage referendum, Maryland answers democratic
socialists’ call for sexual and gender equality.  The law provides a
structural intervention in a legal system that has long had barriers to
gay and lesbian citizens’ enjoying as full benefits as heterosexuals
under the law.  As states systematically pass same-sex marriage laws –
there are 10 now, with Minnesota expected to follow with a prohibition
lifted on Nov. 6 – it becomes a real possibility that something could be
done at the national level in the coming years.

**“Dream Act” approved**\
Marylanders also passed this state’s version of the “Dream Act,” giving
many children of undocumented workers the right to in-state tuition
rates at the state’s higher-education institutions. As the *Baltimore
Sun* reports, it “goes into effect Dec. 6 \[and\] enables students who
were brought to this country as children to pay in-state tuition rates
if they have attended at least three years of high school in state and
can show that they or their parents have paid state taxes during that
time. Students must complete 60 credits at a state community college
before they can apply to pay in-state tuition at a four-year
institution.” A cohort of mostly working-class strivers now has
lower-cost access to education and skills. Public and private entities
should be under more pressure than ever to come up with the jobs to
match. These young people are not the only ones who will benefit from
this new law.  The larger communities and nation benefit by having an
educated population.

**Gambling measure wins**\
Meanwhile, democratic socialists have less to cheer about on some of the
other Maryland referendums.  In spite of an excellent “Anti Question 7”
campaign, voters approved the expansion of gambling in Maryland.  Among
the provisions in this measure is an extension of the number of gambling
venues from six to seven, expanded hours of operation for casinos to
24/7, and huge tax breaks for casino owners for years to come.  This
measure was championed by Governor O’Malley and Prince George’s County
Executive Rushern Baker as a way to fund public education.  In fact,
there is nothing in the law that requires proceeds to go to schools.
 Instead, in all likelihood, the casino business will rake in billions
for the billionaires.\
With a “pro-local development” argument, Baker had worked hard since his
election to office two years ago to interest out-of-state casino owners
who are expected to place a major Las Vegas style casino complex at
National Harbor in Prince George’s County.  These casino magnates are
also expected to use out-of-state contractors to construct the
facilities.  This point was one often lost in the debates prior to the
election, with the focus more often on the school revenues issues.  The
fact that construction unions strongly backed the gambling plan while
the county’s contractors’ association opposed it illustrates the
bewildering mix of interests in this elaborate scenario.  Also lost was
the fact that some of the same casino magnates planning to locate at
National Harbor were cited by the New Jersey Gaming Enforcement
Commission as having ties to organized crime in Macau, a “special
administrative district” (along with Hong Kong) of the People’s Republic
of China.  A May 2009 special report authored by Assistant Attorney
General Josh Lichtblau noted that MGM had made Pansy Ho a partner in a
proposed venture in New Jersey when, in fact, Pansy Ho was under the
influence of her father Stanley Ho, who permitted “organized crime to
operate and thrive within his casinos.”  The Attorney General’s office
recommended that “MGM be directed to disengage itself from direct or
indirect business or financial associations with Pansy Ho, or her
related entities.”  All this is to say that organized crime is likely to
follow the expanded casino business soon to become a feature of National
Harbor.

**Gerrymandered districts left intact\
**Another downside in the election returns was approval of a Maryland
redistricting map that had been redrawn last year by an
O’Malley-appointed commission.  States are required to revise their
federal legislative districts every 10 years in light of changing
population and demographics.  The newly drawn map truly boggles even the
dullest imagination, with legislative districts snaking in and around
(and across) county lines all over the state.

A Nov. 9 *Baltimore Sun* editorial called the Question 5 referendum’s
results on congressional redistricting in Maryland “a disgrace” and a
“badge of shame for the state.”  The *Sun* noted that “It would be hard
to imagine a clearer case of politicians choosing their voters, rather
than the other way around” and said it undermines the fundamental
purpose of the election process. The wording of the referendum question
“seemed intended to mislead,” it said, since the language indicated the
measure was meant to endorse bona fide boundaries of the state’s
congressional districts rather than the product of a gerrymandering
process (which it actually was). Editorial writers concluded:  “If John
Sarbanes’ 3^rd^ District map were superimposed on a 20-year-old map of
South Africa, a reasonable observer would take for granted that such a
political alignment was intended to undermine the political rights of
the unfortunates collected there.”

The underlying racial tensions underlying the federal (congressional)
redistricting process are also at work at the legislative level in
Maryland.  Last year, a similar gerrymandering process took place when
legislative districts were redrawn by a commission appointed by Governor
O’Malley.  The state-level redistricting has been targeted as a civil
rights issue by the Fannie Lou Hamer Political Action Committee,
composed of civil rights attorneys and activists.  On Nov. 9, a Maryland
Court of Appeals heard arguments in the case in which the FLH-PAC is
arguing that although the reapportionment falls within the required 10
per cent population deviation between the largest and smallest district,
the map violates the “one person, one vote” provision in the U.S.
Constitution.  Opponents say that the map overpopulates districts in
rural areas of the state, while urban and suburban districts are
underpopulated, with the effect of giving undue advantage to white
elected officials trying to retain their seats and preventing minority
candidates from fairly challenging them.

***Notes on a near-death experience: the Democrats and Obama in 2012***

Wednesday, November 14th, 2012

 

By Andy Feeney\
Washington Socialist election extra

For U.S. progressives, the 2012 presidential election results offer some
wonderfully positive and some truly terrible news, all at the same
time.  The very good news is that on Nov. 6, a little more than half
the country’s voters rejected a vaguely worded and essentially
elitist Republican plan to revive a stagnant American economy through a
mix of deregulation and massive tax cuts that inevitably would have been
targeted at the very rich.

Along with repudiating the Romney-Ryan tax plan, a thin majority of the
electorate proved resistant to both implicit and some highly
explicit conservative appeals to racist, misogynist, anti-gay,
anti-Muslim and anti-immigrant sentiments that have recently won
a lamentably large fraction of white working class men to a Republican
vision that does not serve their economic interests.

Despite covert and overt conservative appeals to racist fantasies about
Obama’s alleged birth in Kenya, his alleged belief in radical Islam, and
his alleged ties to Communism and terrorist, a majority of Americans who
participated in the election made history by reelecting Barack Hussein
Obama, the nation’s first nonwhite President.  And in doing so, the
winning majority for Obama proved that whatever deeply conflicted
feelings Americans still have about race and religion, the nation
appears to be at least moving (glacially?) in the direction of a more
tolerant and inclusive society.

That’s the good news.  One piece of really awful news, of course, is
that nearly 50 percent of U.S. voters chose on Nov. 6 to vote just the
opposite way — in favor of the Romney/Ryan tax plan and perhaps in favor
of racism, homophobia, religious bigotry, misogyny and rightwing
conspiracy fantasies to some degree.

For many members of the Metro DC chapter of DSA, Obama’s narrow election
victory and Romney’s narrow election defeat undoubtedly brought a surge
of emotional relef — in my case, anyway, I was surprised to find that
the relief  bordered on elation, once all the election results were in. 
But — why was the victory so narrow?

Democratic socialists, at least in DSA, are a fractious lot, and I doubt
any analysis of the elections will win agreement from everyone in the
chapter or in DSA nationwide.  But it seems clear to me that Obama won
such a small majority because Romney’s team, both in the presidential
debates and on the campaign trail, was basically right about the painful
and disgraceful shape of the U.S. economy, some four years after the
catastrophic financial failures of 2008.

Obviously, the Republican leadership in Congress since the start of
Obama’s first term has done almost everything it could to sabotage
efforts by the White House and the congressional Democrats to promote
economic recovery.  Obviously, Mitt Romney’s GOP colleagues in the House
and the Senate share a huge amount of blame for the extensive poverty
and high unemployment that Romney complained about on the campaign
trail, a fact that made Romney’s sanctimonious promises of a
“bipartisan” governing style so morally repellent when he made them in
the debates.

Yet however malevolent the congressional Republicans have been in trying
to block economic recovery under Obama, the harsh truth is that the
White House and the Congressional Democrats have not done anything
resembling an adequate job of trying to promote job growth, or effective
government regulation of the financial industry, or relief for millions
of Americans who have either lost their homes to foreclosure or face the
risk of losing their homes to foreclosure because of the unresolved
mortgage crisis.

In other words, Obama and the mainstream of the Democratic Party also
deserve some of the blame for the high unemployment rates and extensive
poverty that plague the United States in 2012, as some democratic
socialists and other progressive economists have been saying for months
now.  It’s an irony of history that during the 2012 election campaign,
it took a millionaire Republican vulture capitalist with a Cayman
Islands bank account to persuade many voters of this “socialist” truth,
but it is a socialist truth.

Even given the level of GOP bad faith that they’ve faced, why have Obama
and the Democrats been so inadequate since 2008 in fighting poverty,
reducing unemployment and rescuing embattled homeowners from an unfair
foreclosure crisis?

As TIME magazine reporter Michael Grunwald observes in his book *The New
New Deal,* a generally laudatory account of the Obama economic stimulus
program of 2009, the Obama economic team in late 2008 and early 2009
deliberately chose to propose a stimulus plan that their own analysis
suggested was only about half as big as needed to offset the steep
reductions in consumer demand associated with the 2008 financial crash.

Against the advice of liberal Keynsian economists like Paul Krugman and
Joseph Stiglitz, Grunwald reports, the Obama economic advisors — Larry
Summers, Rahm Emanuel and others — decided to propose an economic
stimulus of no more than \$1 trillion, partly on the grounds that it was
politically unrealistic to expect Congress to approve anything bigger.

DSA founder Michael Harrington, in one of his books, once called this
kind of thinking “crackpot realism,” representing “realism” about
perceived political attitudes of the day along with a crackpot, utterly
unrealistic sense of what may be needed to solve actual social and
economic problems.  And the Obama team promoted exactly such a “crackpot
realism” approach to economic stimulus in 2009, partly in hopes that it
could be amended later, given enough Republican good will — but that
good will, of course, never materialized.

In addition to designing an inadequately sized stimulus, Grunwald
reports in “The New New Deal,” the Obama economic team also decided
against focusing the stimulus on economic assistance to financially
embattled state and local governments.

This turns out to have been a near-fatal mistake, for much of the high
unemployment of the past two years has been driven by massive layoffs of
public employees by state and local governments.   However, Grunwald
characterizes  the Obama team as reasoning that even many congressional
Democrats would have little interest in helping the states and cities
financially, for in many cases these units of government were led by
Republican governors and mayors who had won office by demonizing
Democrats and by promising wholly unrealistic tax breaks to the voters.

The Obama team evidently felt that the Democrats on Capitol Hill would
be content to let the responsible Republican leaders suffer from their
own folly — but unfortunately, a side effect of this neglect was that
thousands of teachers, police officers, fire fighters, social workers
and the like lost their jobs as the states and localities spiraled into
fiscal crisis.  Moreover, the Obama team made the pain worse by making
additional cuts in the 2009 stimulus plan to get the votes of Maine
Republican Sens. Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe.

So was Mitt Romney, whatever his other faults, partly correct in blaming
the Democrats and Obama for high unemployment in 2009?  Yes, he was, for
the Obama team’s punting on the size of the stimulus and its inability
or unwillingness to provide adequate financial help to the states and
cities made high job losses inevitable.

The bad news about the economic failures of the Obama team and the
mainstream Democratic Party leadership don’t stop there, however.

The respected financial journalist Charles Ferguson, director of the
award-winning film “Inside Job,” reports in his new book *Predator
Nation* that just like George W. Bush and Bill Clinton before him,
President Obama has named to high economic posts in his administration
certain financial industry officials who by rights should be in prison
by now for financial fraud.

And as long-time DSA activist Bill Barclay, a member of the Chicago
Political Economy Group (CPEG), pointed out in a recent “GET UP”
training on economics for political activists here in the D.C. area,
there have been literally trillions of dollars in financial help that
the federal government has provided to troubled banks, under both the
Bush and the Obama administrations, while pitifully small sums of money
have gone to rescuing millions of American homeowners with “underwater”
mortgages.

Finally there is the question of “free trade” and corporate governance. 
As Roger Bybee points out in the latest issue of the leftist economic
journal *Dollars & Sense*,  the Obama campaign in 2012 appealed to
embattled US workers partly by portraying Romney as a heartless vulture
capitalist whose leadership of Bain Capital resulted in the outsourcing
of American jobs to low-wage Asian countries such as China.

Yet as Bybee notes in “Obama’s Double Game on Outsourcing:  Ripping
Romney While Pushing Free Trade,” the Obama White House has successfully
pushed through three new free trade treaties —  with South Korea,
Panama and Columbia, respectively — that “foster the shift of production
from the United States to low-wage offshore sites—often in authoritarian
nations denying basic labor rights.”

Robert Scott of the Economic Policy Institute (EPI) has predicted
that “the South Korea deal alone will cost 159,000 U.S. workers their
jobs,” Bybee reports in *Dollars & Sense*.

Worse still may be to come, for the Obama White House appears to be
working behind closed doors with representatives of corporate America to
enact an even more far-reaching, more anti-labor and anti-consumer
treaty, the proposed Trans Pacific Partnership or TPP, that would give
unelected tribunals of corporate representatives new powers to kill
“protective regulations on finance, the environment, workplace safety,
and other vital measures enacted by democratically elected governments.”

How should democratic socialists and other US progressives respond to
the pattern of Democratic Party pandering to popular Republican
prejudices and elite corporate interests that the above facts suggest?

In recent internet exchanges by DSA activists at the national level,
many leading progressives have argued that our first priority must be to
head off new “bipartisan” attacks on Social Security, Medicare and other
social spending programs as President Obama and the House Republicans
engaged in new talks about how to avert the “fiscal cliff” now under
discussion in the mainstream press.  Progressive activists from many
different constituencies have a common interest in blocking joint
Republican and Democratic efforts to avoid the “fiscal cliff” by
slashing spending on the poor, the near poor and the mainstream middle
class, leading DSA thinkers are suggesting.

Efforts to meet the immediate crisis posed by the “fiscal cliff” issue
should not distract democratic socialists and other progressives from a
larger problem, though.

As Charles Ferguson argues in *Predator Nation,* and as political
scientists Jacob Hacker and Paul Pierson have documented in
*Winner-Take-All Politics:  How Washington Made the Rich Richer — and
Turned Its Back on the Middle Class*, the reality is that the Democratic
Party has partly been captured by the same wealthy campaign donors and
the same set of powerful corporations that today virtually monopolize
economic thinking in GOP circles.

In the ongoing campaign by the wealthiest “1 percent” to keep control
over the US government, Hacker and Pierson have noted, the Republican
Party today is playing the role of a classic Hollywood villain — but the
Democratic Party, for all its pretenses to the contrary, is far from
being a champion of the people.  The “near-death” experience of the
Obama campaign and the Democratic mainstream in 2012 should be a
reminder to all serious progressives that the US left needs to devise
some effective way of capturing control over the Democratic Party for
the benefit of the working class — or, alternatively, finding some other
way of battling against both Republican economic elitism and its
Democratic shadow.

If this analysis seems like treason to Democratic Party loyalists, let’s
remember just how close the President and the party came to losing
everything in this year’s election — at least partly over economic
reasons.

If the Democrats and the Obama White House don’t improve their economic
performance, and if the Republicans next time choose a candidate who is
not a flip-flopping millionaire vulture capitalist with a bank account
in the Cayman Islands, who’s to say that the GOP won’t take the White
House next time?

***Senate Outcome Boosts Progressive Prospects***

By Jose Gutierrez\
Washington Socialist election extra

Democrats have maintained control of the Senate. A few months ago,
people would have found this to be a surprising result. In many ways the
results of the Senate election are more impressive than those of the
Presidential race.

More surprising and more significant to us on the left, the new Senate
will be more progressive than the former one.

Chris Murphy in Connecticut is replacing Joe Lieberman — the same
Lieberman who was a cheerleader for the Iraq war, and who endorsed John
McCain in 2008. Jim Webb is being replaced by the more progressive Tim
Kaine in Virginia. Also, the conservative states of Indiana and Missouri
have both elected moderates that are substantially to the left of their
rivals.  Perversely, we can thank the Tea Party sensibility and its
over-the-top social issues rhetoric for this turn of events.

There will be 20 women in the next Senate, a record.  One of the biggest
upsets came in North Dakota where Democrat Heidi Heitkamp defeated Rick
Berg.  In Hawaii, Daniel Akaka is being replaced by Mazie Hirono, one of
the most liberal members of the House. She will be the first
Asian-American woman in the Senate.  Tammy Baldwin in Wisconsin, the
first openly gay Senator, will replace Herb Kohl.  Elizabeth Warren, a
staunch progressive will be the next senator from Massachusetts,
replacing Republican Scott Brown.

Many of the new Senators are committed to reforming the filibuster,
which has been used by Republicans to stop progressive reform. The
significance of real filibuster reform can’t be underestimated. If it
weren’t for the filibuster, a cap and trade scheme would have been
approved in the previous Senate. It is also possible that a jobs program
could have been passed soon after the health care reform bill was
approved by the Senate in 2010. The likelihood of reform of existing
labor law would have been much greater.

If any of the justices of the Supreme Court step down, the composition
of the new Senate could be decisive. More liberal justices in the
Supreme Court might lead to the reversal of decisions such as Citizens
United.

The left will also have a better shot at stopping any “grand bargain”
that makes regressive cuts to Social Security and Medicare. Only through
the pressure of social movements can democratic socialists expect a
result that preserves these social gains from the past, but we have a
better chance of success because of the results of the Nov. 6th Senate
election.

 

***Socialist FAQ: Living like a Socialist***

Friday, November 2nd, 2012

Phil Barber asks:  What is DSA’s core philosophy and how it can be lived
in daily life and practiced in our conduct and relations with others?

Great Question Phil! That’s a pretty broad question so let’s tackle the
question of the DSA’s core philosophy first. The best source document
for DSA’s core philosophy is [**Where we
Stand**](http://www.dsausa.org/about/where.html) although as noted in
that document “Since DSA is a pluralist organization, no single document
can adequately and equally reflect our diverse perspectives.” However
the document goes on to establish some universal values that match my
personal experience in talking to members. Probably the most concise
description is:

We are socialists because we share a vision of a humane international
social order based both on democratic planning and market mechanisms to
achieve equitable distribution of resources, meaningful work, a healthy
environment, sustainable growth, gender and racial equality, and
non-oppressive relationships.

That is probably the most concise description of the DSA’s core
philosophy. We know that every person deserves the dignity of a good
job, safe housing, quality education, decent healthcare and, most
importantly, the right to a say in how these things are distributed.

Our vision of socialism is a profoundly democratic one, rooted in the
belief that individuals can only reach their full potential in a society
that embodies the values of liberty, equality, and solidarity. Only
through creating material and cultural bonds of solidarity across
racial, gender, age, national, and class lines can true equality of
opportunity be achieved.

So how do we apply these principles to our everyday lives? As they say,
the devil is in the details. There appears to be a significant
difference of opinion on this from person to person even within the DSA
and it is perhaps something that we need to discuss more. I’m not
familiar with any practical guide to living like a socialist, so I’m
going to draw heavily from my personal experience and thoughts on the
matter. I will start with one of the least controversial – how we
interact daily with the people around us.

In terms of our relationships with other people, it’s important to think
about that most important socialist concept: solidarity. What is
solidarity? There is a sociological, technical definition, but for
socialists, it’s the idea that all of humanity is a family, so we have
similar responsibilities to someone in Asia or Africa as we would to
someone in our personal circle of friends and family. Another way of
stating this is that we are all in this together, an injury to one is an
injury to all or that actions taken on one side of the world have
tangible repercussions for those living on the other. This is perhaps
more true now then it has ever been in human history.

Now does this mean we should go up to strangers in the streets and hug
them? Most people probably are not ready for that. But it does mean that
we should treat those around us with the same respect and dignity we all
crave, regardless of truly trivial and arbitrarily determined things
such as race, gender and class. This is not to say that differences do
not exist, for they surely do, but if we want to reconcile those
differences or work together towards goals critical to us all we need to
think about what we have in common, which is a great deal.

In practical terms this may be as simple as being polite to the other
sufferers of the morning commute, realizing that they are going though
the same struggle as you. It may mean talking to the janitor(s) at work
and learning about their struggles, maybe even offering your assistance
or being honest with your coworkers about how much you make. Small steps
such as these may seem trivial at first, but they can lead to big
changes. If you can, talk to your coworkers about their grievances and
consider forming a union. This is a big and somewhat risky step, but the
rewards are tremendous. When we refuse to conform to a system, even in a
small way, we are fighting that system which relies on our compliance.
Capitalist society often discourages this sort of behavior, because a
divided family cannot work together. It pits us against each other when
we should be working together.

This is no less true in the household. This is of course a deeply
personal matter, but it’s important to remember that ties – blood,
religious, hormonal or otherwise – do not negate human rights. The
historical family unit has not been one of mutual respect and although
it predates capitalism, it is a division that capitalists have
exploited. However, you don’t have to arrange your family in the
traditional patriarchal way. If partners work together for common goals
and seek to ensure each other’s success while respecting each other’s
rights to self determination the outcome is more likely to be positive
(of course nothing is assured).

Children are not something I have experience with so I would not presume
to be an expert on raising a child as a socialist, but, here are some
thoughts. The most important skill you can teach your children is how to
think for themselves and question everything around them. Not only is
this important to having a good, healthy social discourse and allowing
them to participate in a democratic society, but it is also a critical
survival skill in a deregulated marketplace. The other thing I would say
is that it’s essential to be engaged as a parent, particularly when your
children are young i.e. Preschool-Kindergarten. There is a wealth of
science to back this up, but it appears that this is when a great deal
of essential soft skills are learned that are very difficult to learn
later in life.

Your finances are a place where it is easy to be a socialist. One of the
most important things you can do is move your money to a credit union. A
credit union is a great example of democratic socialist organization. A
credit union is a member-owned financial cooperative, democratically
controlled by its members, and operated for the purpose of promoting
thrift, providing credit at competitive rates, and providing other
financial services to its members.  Many credit unions also provide
services intended to support community development or sustainable
international development on a local level, and could be considered
community development financial institutions. This takes your money out
of the hands of international banks and back into your community. While
there are restrictions in the US that limit the ability of credit unions
to completely take the place of private banks, if enough people took
their money out of banks and put it into credit unions this could
change. As an added bonus, depositors usually get higher interest rates
then they do at banks.

I could go on a great deal about what to do as a socialist in your
everyday life. I have not even touched on subjects such as consumption
and the environment, and I could go into much more depth on any of the
subjects covered, like finance. I have tried to touch on some practical
things that anyone can work on. Before I finish, I want to say two more
things. First, one of the most important things you can do as a
socialist is be an advocate for change. Volunteer your time and/or
resources to protect others and yourself from social injustices. Second,
nobody is perfect and you’re going to make mistakes; that is OK, just
make sure you learn from them. I hope this is a beginning to the answer
of how to live like a socialist.

***That Emerging Majority***

Wednesday, November 14th, 2012

By Jose Gutierrez\
Washington Socialist election extra

Ten years ago John Judis and Ruy Texeira wrote a book called *The
Emerging Democratic Majority* in which they argued that demographic
changes would lead to a Democratic electoral majority. The timing of
their book couldn’t have been worse. Months after the book, came out
Republicans made gains in the 2002 midterm elections and then in 2004
Bush was reelected.

The election of November 6th seems to have proved, 10 years later, some
of the points made in the book.

The writers argued that even though the George McGovern campaign had
been defeated by a huge margin in the 1972 election it had
over–performed among certain groups: minorities, working and single
women, the college educated and skilled professionals —  and that those
groups would represent a majority of the electorate in the future.

Minority voters went from being 26% in 2008 to 28% in 2012. This proved
to be an unpleasant surprise to the Romney campaign. They had expected
the minority vote to remain at the same level and had hoped to mobilize
enough white voters through subtle and sometimes not so subtle cues
appealing to racial resentment to win the election.

In both 2008 and 2012, 80% of minority voters voted for Obama. Obama
actually did better among Hispanics in 2012 (71-27) than he did in 2008
(67-31).

In Florida he won 60% of the Hispanic vote, partly due to an increase in
the Puerto Rican population of the state, which traditionally votes
Democratic. According to some polls he might have won has much as 50% of
the Cuban vote in Florida. If true, this would be the highest percentage
won by a Democrat among an ethnic group that has voted Republican in the
past.

Obama’s support among Asian-Americans went from 62-35 to 73-26.

Obama won a substantial majority among women, in particular single
women, among those with a postgraduate education, and among young
voters. In fact, the number of younger voters went up from 2008.

Obama won more than 70% of the LGBT vote.

However, democratic socialists can’t count on the inexorable march of
demographics to make the country more progressive for two reasons. One
is a long-term reason, the other is more immediate.

Racial identity is a very flexible and shifting concept and groups that
are marginalized today will not be tomorrow. Hispanics and
Asian-Americans have high rates of intermarriage. It is very likely that
the ethnic identity of today’s minorities will weaken and that they will
move from supporting the Democrats to supporting Republicans much as did
Italian Americans and Irish Americans.

Today’s Republican  Party is exclusionary and xenophobic but tomorrow’s
conservatives will have to adapt to the new America.

The other much more immediate reason and more obvious to us democratic
socialists and to other left activists is that much of the Democratic
Party is committed to neoliberalism. We could end up with a country that
is more racially tolerant, with more symbolic if not real gender
equality – but one assimilated to the neoliberal consensus that
persistent structural inequality is just the economic facts of life.

Part of the broad project of the left has to be to rally as much support
among the elements of this potential majority as possible to push the
country towards social democracy before this opportunity slips from our
fingers.
