***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from the December 2014 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Washington Socialist for December 2014 — An Activist Agenda for
2015*](http://dsadc.org/washington-socialist-for-december-2014-an-activist-agenda-for-2015/)

Tuesday, December 2nd, 2014

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the *Washington Socialist* for December 2014. This is the
year-end version of the monthly newsletter of the Metro DC Democratic
Socialists of America.**

***AN URGENT NOTE — THE DC METRO LOCAL MEMBERSHIP MEETING DEC. 13 IS
CANCELED SO MEMBERS CAN JOIN THE NATIONAL ACTION AGAINST POLICE VIOLENCE
ON THAT DATE.* *DC METRO DSA WILL GATHER AT THE OLD POST OFFICE PAVILION
AT 9:30 A.M. AND JOIN THE MAIN ACTION AT FREEDOM PLAZA AROUND 10:30.
WATCH FOR OUR BANNER AND SIGNS.*** (This note added Dec. 9)

The local is gearing up for 2015 – possibly a year of considerable
struggle –  and plans for activism are in formation, as you’ll see. But
first, a nod to the holiday season.

*HERE’S A CALENDAR ITEM ADDED SINCE THE EMAIL VERSION OF THE
NEWSLETTER*: Our new **Happy Hours** in Northern Virginia continue Dec.
11 at 6:30 p.m. in the Arlington Pub (inside the Whole Foods, 2700
Wilson Blvd., Arlington). RSVP at the
[*Meetup*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/218992214/) site.  Metro
DC DSA’s regular **membership meeting** is ***canceled*** (see new note
above) The **Socialist Salon** meets Thursday evening Dec. 18, 6:30 at
Hunan Dynasty, 215 Penna. Ave. SE. Check our [*Meetup
site*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=04d1be8301&e=003de9ccab)
for updates. Jobs with Justice honors the Scrooges of the Year at its
[*Masquerade
Ball*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=1ea9e090b1&e=003de9ccab)
Dec. 4, 7 to 11 at the Josephine Butler Mansion, 2437 15th St. NW (at
Euclid St.). Entertainment, food, a DJ and roast plutocrat on a platter.

And for our own take on Scrooge, this month’s articles begin with:

[***Cratchit’s Christmas
Cubicle***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=efb76818f6&e=003de9ccab):
you don’t have to be a lefty to be suspicious of the Dickensian notion
that the holiday spirit will permanently turn corporate greedheads into
philanthopists. Even in the era of the “dark Satanic mills,” workers
knew better than that; Bill Mosley provides an alternate ending to the
saga of our favorite, eponymous Scrooge.\
[***Socialist Action in
2015***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=3b34895293&e=003de9ccab):
A year-end strategy meeting of Metro DC DSA’s activists sets a course
for the year we are facing; every facet of our activity got a positive
but unsparing critique and follow-up plan for activity.\
[***Troublemakers
Schoo***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f73df7dbb9&e=003de9ccab)**l:**
A conference put together by the magazine *Labor Notes* focused on the
kind of organizing that DC-area workers and progressive activists need
to do. Dave Richardson and Woody Woodruff were among the DSA attendees
and report on the nuts-and-bolts spirit of the event.\
[***Expanding the
Terrain***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ca617ee153&e=003de9ccab):
Progressive Maryland, preparing to deal with a Republican governor,
stretches out beyond its Montgomery County roots to organize in Prince
George’s County. Woody Woodruff reports on the prospects.\
[***Money, Power,
Election***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=cfc8624d2d&e=003de9ccab)**s**:
The Socialist Salon reviews the DC election with an overview from Rev.
Graylan Hagler, a candidate for City Council endorsed by Metro DC DSA.
The appropriation of public housing by the private development cartel
has echoes at the polls in a report from Dave Richardson, David Duhalde
and Woody Woodruff.\
[***Facing the Next Two
Years***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7bd64b0219&e=003de9ccab):
The results of the 2014 election were more unpleasant even than billed
by the pollsters. What are the prospects for progressive or radical
action when the corporate and financialist hegemony appears to have
tightened its grip? Andy Feeney surveys the landscape.\
***REVIEWS***\
[***Sleep and Accept or Awake and
Sing***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ed9ae8c5a3&e=003de9ccab):
How does drama about history – or radical drama with a history – become
relevant for today? Kurt Stand discusses some local attempts, including
one classic Clifford Odets play, and concludes that some do it better
than others.\
[***Human
Capita***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=5429a43a57&e=003de9ccab)**l**:
A forthcoming film about the lives of workers that uses multiple
perspectives is previewed by Dan Adkins.\
[***Living in Poverty— The Insider’s
View***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=5035f93fe6&e=003de9ccab):
Linda Tirado has experienced poverty as few of us have – as a continuum
with little or no chance of change. Bill Mosley reviews her book *Hand
to Mouth:  Living in Bootstrap America.*\
[***Good Reads for
Socialists***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=bf1ddeee8d&e=003de9ccab):
a variety of articles to while away your holiday.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*“Troublemakers School” Schools Activists in Tackling Trouble Facing
Progressives*](http://dsadc.org/troublemakers-school-schools-activists-in-tackling-trouble-facing-progressives/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist*&lt;&gt;December 2014**

*By Dave Richardson and Woody Woodruff*

Organizing and activism for both union members and the public with which
they relate was on top of the agenda at the 2014 DC *Labor Notes*
Troublemakers School at the Foundry Methodist Church on Saturday,
November 15 2014.

The event, sponsored by the Metropolitan Washington Central Labor
Council (MWCLC) and DC Jobs with Justice (DC JwJ), attracted perhaps as
many as 150 of the cream of the DC labor and community activist left. 
*Labor Notes* is a monthly print newsletter that keeps labor activists
informed about cutting edge labor news from around the country.  Julia
Kann, until recently on the staff of MWCLC President Jos Williams and
now with *Labor Notes*, was the public face, ably assisted by Mark
Brenner and the New York staff.

Kann and Williams opened the morning plenary with a welcome, Kann noting
that Washington, DC “the only unionization to come out of “Fight for
\$15” \[the minimum wage campaign\] was in D.C.” And Williams urged “if
you want to change American society so that justice is simply something
that we automatically do… be a troublemaker.”

There were morning breakout sessions on Secrets of a Successful
Organizer, Know Your Rights on the Job, Assertive Grievance Handling,
and Fighting Privatization. DSA members Colson Breen, Monica Owens, Dave
Richardson and Woody Woodruff attended the Troublemakers School and
scattered to different workshops. “Privatization is a major issue for my
union, American Federation of Government Employees, so I attended
\[that\] one,” Richardson said.  Presenters Kewana Battle-Mason and
Jackie Jeter from the Amalgamated Transit Union (ATU), and Rich Shelley
of the American Postal Workers Union were facilitated by Samantha
Winslow of Labor Notes, who also pinch hit for the Washington Teachers
Union (WTU).  “The Postal Workers seem to me to be putting up the best
fight, picketing Staples all over the country over the opening of post
offices in Staples stores staffed by private, Staples employees,”
Richardson observed.  On Friday, November 14, as the culmination of a
long series of actions, they had a raucous demonstration at Postal
Service HQ here in Washington, and at the end of the day embattled
Postmaster General Patrick Donahoe announced his “retirement.” Shelley
also focused on Congress’s discriminatory requirement that the Postal
Service, unlike any other public-private entity, fully fund employee
pensions for the distant future – resulting in paper losses, “phony
numbers,” for an enterprise that actually continues to make a profit.

Of other public-sector unions, ATU president Jeter outlined the threat
to public transit as an increasing number of Metrobus routes were
eliminated in favor of Circulator routes designed for affluent areas and
employing poorly paid non-union workers with little experience and
training. Battle-Mason recounted similar problems with private companies
contracted to provide public transit, trimming costs by cutting wages
and using poorly maintained vehicles. Battle-Mason had provided similar
evidence to a Socialist Salon late in 2013 and it was clear little had
changed.

Winslow focused on the need for educators to forge community ties and
gave as an example the Chicago Teachers Union strike of the past year, a
significant victory against an overreaching Mayor Rahm Emanuel.
Chicago’s teachers successfully communicated to the public what they
were bargaining over, and “they built those relationships in advance.”

Jeter summed up: Although public sector unions were most under attack
now, “all unions have to start talking collectively about
privatization.”

Jos Williams wrapped the session with the admonition that the work ahead
required internal union education – “understand the issue and be
committed” – as well as organizing with other unions to achieve
overarching solidarity and mobilizing the community. “This is going to
take discipline,” he argued, so “think like an army.”\
There ensued a lively discussion in which Richardson, a board member of
Jobs with Justice, was vigorously applauded for his statement that it
was time for AFGE to resign its seat on the Democratic National
Committee both in order to effectively lobby a Republican Congress but
also because the Democrats have failed in their supposed goals of
passing progressive legislation and of keeping the Republicans out.  “Of
course they \[Democrats\] have prevented the Republicans from illegally
contracting out civilian employees at DoD, by contracting them out
themselves.  They have also prevented the Republicans from imposing a
wage freeze on Federal employees, by imposing a wage freeze themselves. 
In a similar vein they have prevented the Republicans from starting
another losing war in the Middle East, keeping the country in an
interminable recession by NOT passing a big enough economic stimulus
package, and keeping Guantanamo open.”\
The afternoon featured workshops on Creative Tactics, Beating Apathy,
Community-Labor Alliances, and Organizing Across Borders, which seem to
have been well-received despite an old friend admitting that she fell
asleep during the Apathy session.  The Community-Labor session featured
speakers from JwJ, WTU, and ATU.

Again there was a lively discussion as all the participants and
attendees realized that Labor can’t win in this climate without broad
community support.   DC JwJ director Nikki Lewis observed that unions
had a real struggle reaching the community in “the hyper-transactional
capitalist culture.” Still, she said, victories came after defeats. The
Large Retailer Accountability Act, which would have tamed Walmart’s
low-wage approach, passed the Council but was vetoed by the mayor. But,
she said, it broke conceptual ground with the community’s consciousness
that led to the successful passage of minimum wage hikes in the
District. “The success story that stuck with me,” Richardson said, “was
that, on day four (of nine) in the Chicago teachers’ strike last year,
56 percent of the residents trusted the teachers to do the right thing
regarding education while only 36 percent trusted Mayor Rahm Emanuel.”

“For those of us, liberals, progressives, and racial minorities as well
as socialists, for whom the political system doesn’t work, *Labor Notes*
and the Troublemakers School offers a different direction,” said
Richardson. “By focusing on organizing at work and in our communities,
it is an attempt to bypass the ‘two capitalist party system’ in favor of
organizing from below for of our rights and our economic well-being.”

[*A Christmas Carol: The Alternate
Ending*](http://dsadc.org/a-christmas-carol-the-alternate-ending/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

*By Bill Mosley (with apologies to Mr. Dickens)*

*“What’s to-day, my fine fellow?” said Scrooge.*

*          “To-day!” replied the boy.  “Why, CHRISTMAS DAY.”*

*          “It’s Christmas Day!” said Scrooge to himself.  “I haven’t
missed it.  The Spirits have done it all in one night.”*

Scrooge pondered the events that had transpired, unbelievably, over the
past night — the visits from the three spirits who had carried him to
Christmases past, present and future.  One spirit had led Scrooge to
revisit the holidays of his own past; the second had shown to him the
difficult lives led by the English lower classes – including that of his
clerk, Bob Cratchit, and his family – this Christmas and every day; the
third had foretold Scrooge’s own death and how little sorrow there would
be to see the old miser go.  He mulled over the message of the ghosts
and the visions they had revealed to him.  Should he repent of a life
dedicated to accumulating money and use some of his wealth to help raise
up the less fortunate?

Then he thought of his journeys of the past night, how real yet unreal,
and how so much seemingly had happened as would easily occupy a week or
more.  All of that could not have happened in a single night, Scrooge
thought.  Then he suddenly slapped himself on the forehead:  It had been
only a dream!  There were no spirits; he had not left the comfort of his
bedroom!  It had all been in his head.

Scrooge breathed a sigh of relief.  “And to think, I had almost
convinced myself to change my ways, to give up the pursuit of profit!” 
he said.  “Imagine how that would have drained my bank account!  Become
a woolly-headed old philanthropist tossing coins to beggars in the
streets.  How could free enterprise prosper if every businessman acted
that way?”

He now felt like his old self again.  Happily he shaved and dressed, and
then strolled out into the busy street where he greeted every “Merry
Christmas!” with a testy “Bah!  Humbug!”  He stopped by a confectionary
store where he bought two dozen gingerbread men, and then returned home
to enjoy biting off their heads.

But his greatest joy was anticipating returning to the office the
following day.  Cratchit would surely slink in late, no doubt hung over
from the previous day’s merrymaking.  When I catch him not at his desk
on time, Scrooge thought, I’ll put the fear of dismissal into his head,
and then dock his pay!  He rubbed his hands eagerly.  Maybe Christmas
can be joyful after all, he mused.

And so on Boxing Day Scrooge walked into his office a few minutes before
nine.  As he had predicted, Cratchit’s chair was unoccupied.  Scrooge
took a seat at his own desk and was having a pleasant time reading his
profit ledgers when he heard a commotion outside.

“What the dickens is that?” Scrooge barked to himself.  He hurried to
the door and flung it open to find himself face to face with Cratchit. 
The clerk was not alone; behind him stood a line of men and women, many
of them – it seemed to Scrooge – bearing a strong resemblance to the
working-class characters he had seen during his outing with the Ghost of
Christmas Present.  All were carrying placards bearing slogans such as
“Unfair!” “Scrooge Abuses His Workers!” and “A Living Wage for All
Cratchits!”  They were chanting a slogan such as Scrooge had never
heard:  “The people united/will never be defeated!”  The people –
united!  What kind of nonsense was that?

“What is the meaning of this?”  Scrooge screamed at Cratchit.  “You were
supposed to be at your desk fifteen minutes ago!  Get to work this
instant or you’re fired!”

“Not until our demands are met,” said Cratchit calmly.  “We are on
strike – against you and all bosses who drive workers like slaves for
starvation wages.”

“All of us ‘ave walked out!” shouted a man whose sooty clothes
identified him as a coal miner.  “We can’t expect you rich folk to do
the right thing out of the goodness of yer ‘earts, can we?”

“Once a capitalist, always a capitalist!” said a young woman, attired
for factory work.  “It’s in yer blood.”

“We don’t want none of yer charity!”  shouted a man.  “We’ll fight for
what’s rightfully ours!”

Cratchit handed Scrooge a leaflet, which the old man perused nervously. 
It listed the workers’ demands:  a living wage, health benefits, safe
working conditions, retirement pensions.  “What?”  bellowed Scrooge. 
“Have you all gone mad?”

“No, we’ve just come to our senses,” Cratchit replied.

“I’ll bring you to your senses!”  Scrooge screamed.  “You’re fired!”

“And who will do all the work – you?”  Cratchit asked.  Scrooge looked
around at the determined faces of the picketing workers.

“Bah!  Humbug!” he screamed, before hastily fleeing into the sanctuary
of his office.  As he cowered inside, the marching and chanting outside
resumed.

Panting and sweating, Scrooge looked warily at the leaflet Cratchit had
handed him.  What now? Scrooge wondered.  What would he and his fellow
business owners do?

He had no idea.  “God help us every one,” he moaned.

[*Facing the Next Two Years of GOP Dominance: Thoughts on Progressive
Responses to the
Election*](http://dsadc.org/facing-the-next-two-years-of-gop-dominance-thoughts-on-progressive-responses-to-the-election/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

*By Andy Feeney*

For socialists and other progressives, as we look back on the event,
there’s some good news and some bad news about the 2014 election.  The
good news, for some of us, is that some timid and mediocre Democrats
this year lost their bids for political office.  Their losses, which
many analysts had expected, arguably stemmed from an inability or
unwillingness to present low-income and middle class voters, African
Americans, Latinos and younger voters with a compelling reason to come
to the polls on Nov. 4.

Some progressives therefore see the election as powerful evidence that
the Democratic Party, to mobilize its own political base, urgently needs
to become much more progressive, especially on issues of income
inequality and job creation.  Thus it’s possible that this year’s low
turnout and stunning Democratic losses will result, over time, in a
better Democratic Party.  There’s also a minority on the left sees the
election as reason for progressives to abandon the Democratic Party
entirely for some third party that presumably would be better — for
example, the Greens.

The bad news about the election, of course, and some would say the
terrible news, is that a ruthless, hypocritical, economically elitist,
scientifically brain-dead, racist, demagogic, gay-bashing,
immigrant-bashing, religiously bigoted, union-busting and sexist GOP
managed to win extensive power, both nationally and in dozens of state
governments.

Obviously when we consider the historical long term, this year’s
Republican sweep of the Senate races and the victories of numerous
conservative Republican governors don’t compare to, say, the devastation
of medieval Europe by the Plague, or the sacking of Rome by the
Visigoths.   On the other hand, many winning Republicans this year
apparently do have the morals of Visigoths.

Over the past generation, the GOP has gained growing political clout
partly by prostituting its policy wing to powerful rightwing
corporations and the super-wealthy, as political scientist Jacob Hacker
and Paul Pierson have noted in their book *Winner-Take-All Politics. *
In service to the upper “1 percent,” Republicans since Reagan’s day have
racked up enormous national debts by giving sweeping tax cuts to the
rich, then have turned around and argued that in the interest of
“balanced budgets,” it is urgently important to slash liberal spending
programs to help the poor, the middle class and the environment.

Recently many of these same Republicans have demanded reductions in
federal spending for food stamps at the very time they have denounced
Obama for failing to improve the economy enough to reduce poverty and
unemployment – a stunning display of political hypocrisy and Social
Darwinism that seems designed to reduce low-income Americans to economic
desperation.

Over the past few years, partly in response to Obama’s sweeping 2008
election victory, Republicans at the state level also have worked
diligently to suppress the voting – and some would say,  the voting
rights – of low-income voters and racial minorities.  In this way they
have essentially worked to undermine American democracy, no matter what
they may think they are doing: in the view of some black commentators,
they are effectively working to bring back Jim Crow politics, at least
in the South.

Republican governors in Wisconsin, Michigan, and Indiana over the past
few years have drastically reduced the bargaining rights of unions. 
Michigan governor Rick Snyder’s astounding success in making his state –
long a bastion of the UAW, and hence of union strength – into a “right
to work” state strikes some pessimistic labor observers as a blow aimed
at the very existence of organized labor in this country.

Republican attacks on “welfare cheaters” over the years, meanwhile, have
repeatedly used racially loaded code words to spread negative
stereotypes about black Americans in general, amounting to what some
critics call “dog whistle” racist politics, and the Republican Party’s
longstanding homophobia and attacks on women’s reproductive rights are
notorious.

In terms of global climate change, the GOP leadership today appears to
be split between politicians who, like Sen. James Inhofe of Oklahoma,
may actually have convinced themselves that the whole issue is a giant
liberal hoax designed to wreck the U.S. economy, and a minority of
intelligent Republicans, like John McCain and Mitt Romney, who must know
better, and have said so in the past, but are now willing to reverse
course 180 degrees and lie about the problem for political advantage.

Now, for all intents and purposes, the fine, upstanding people who have
been promoting this brand of sleazy politics for the past generation are
apparently going to dominate the U.S. Senate and a majority of state
governments around the country through 2016.  What are these likely to
bring us in the way of political leadership — except stupidity,
hypocrisy, cruelty and greed?

And yet no matter how angry some progressives are about this reality,
and no matter how depressed or simply numb others may feel in the wake
of the Nov. 4 results, the practical question facing all of us is what
do we need to do now, under adverse circumstances, to work and fight for
a better future in what promises to be a fairly bad time?

I can’t speak for anyone in DSA except myself, but to me, the next two
years present progressives and democratic socialists with several
important challenges.   One urgent one, arguably, is providing what
solidarity we can to those groups and constituencies whom the
Republicans have targeted most harshly in recent years – notably new
immigrants, African American voters, the poor of all races,
public-sector unions, and advocates for women’s reproductive rights and
freedoms.  LGBT  people also urgently need our support, although recent
legal rulings in favor of gay marriage and polls showing a growing
acceptance of gay people in this country, even among Republicans, may
mean that the new GOP majority in the Senate won’t be as hostile to gay
rights as Republicans traditionally have been.

How much real support the progressive left can or will provide to
liberal environmental groups over the next two years is a good
question.   However, environmental groups and environmental causes are
likely to take a shellacking from the GOP-dominated Congress through
2016.  Some extreme GOP conservatives, like Sen. Inhofe and Texas
governor Rick Perry, are echoing the Koch brothers / fossil fuels
industry / U.S. Chamber of Commerce line that excessive government
regulation is the cause of most of the country’s economic woes;
therefore Republican attacks on EPA funding and EPA legal mandates seem
fairly likely.

On the Keystone XL Pipeline issue, Senate Republicans and a minority of
Senate Democrats have just failed by a one-vote margin to pass a
filibuster-proof bill in favor of completing the pipeline’s last leg,
and when the Republicans take control of the Senate veto in January they
seem likely to push through another pipeline bill that Obama will find
it hard to resist.  Already, in the run-up to the recent pipeline vote,
*Washington Post* columnist Ruth Marcus has suggested that Obama needs
to “throw the Congressional Democrats under the bus” on the pipeline,
trading his approval for Keystone for GOP acquiescing to something else
Obama wants – continued authorization for EPA to continue regulating CO²
emissions from coal-burning power plants, for example.  Some liberal
Democrats also seem to favor letting the pipeline through in order to
save the careers of the few remaining Democrats representing coal- and
oil-dependent states, assuming that Louisiana senator Mary Landrieu
survives a tough run-off race in a few weeks’ time.

One of the sleeper issues that progressives urgently need to attend to
over the coming months, meanwhile, is the risk that Obama and the new
Republican leadership in the Senate, in order to prove that they can
transcend partisan wrangling and “get things done” as voters supposedly
are demanding, will agree on two sweeping new measures to benefit huge
multinational corporations at the expense of labor, consumers, and even
the legal sovereignty of American governments, whether at the state,
local or federal level.

Judging from analysis in the *Wall Street Journal, New York Times* and
*Washington Post* published in the first few days after the election,
two areas of likely bipartisan comprise that business interests are
hoping the GOP victory will make possible are

\(A) passage of “fast-track” authority allowing Obama to push the
proposed Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) and possibly a proposed
Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) through Congress
with minimal debate; and

\(B)  joint efforts by Republicans and Democrats to “reform” the U.S. tax
code by drastically cutting income tax rates for large corporations.

According to the Obama White House as well as the Republicans, corporate
tax “reform” in the way of steeply lower rates is needed to make U.S.
corporations more globally competitive, while possibly reducing the
motivations big companies have for shifting their headquarters overseas
to take advantage of so-called tax inversions.   Even liberal Democrat
Ron Wyden of Oregon joined with Republican conservative Dave Camp of
Michigan this year to propose a version of corporate tax reform, and
with the GOP in charge of the Senate and liberal Democratic voices more
muted than they have been, it’s possible that such “reform” could now
sail through Congress and be signed into law.

So far, the mainstream media report that bipartisan agreement on
corporate tax reform  has been blocked because Obama and the Democrats
want such a tax law change to produce new revenue for the government, so
as to reduce government deficit, while the Republicans – despites
decades of grandstanding on and the U.S. national debt —   are demanding
that it be revenue-neutral. But if Democrats and Republicans can
compromise their differences, corporate tax rates may be slashed
further, at the likely cost of even greater income inequality being
generated by the tax code.

Toward the end of November, veto threats from the White House appeared
to stall a more pernicious version of this tax proposal, pending
adjustment to ease the burden on poor and middleclass taxpayers.

On TPP, TTIP and other ‘free trade” issues, Obama is on record as
favoring such agreements, both to contain Chinese economic power in the
Pacific and supposedly as a way of generating new U.S. jobs. Public
Citizen, on the other hand, has compared TPP to “NAFTA on steroids” and
argued that it will give foreign corporations covered by the treaty the
legal power to overturn U.S. laws that interfere with their
profitability in ways that allegedly generate trade distortions.

The AFL-CIO and many environmental and consumer organizations have been
hostile to TPP, and Harry Reid as Senate Majority Leader has blocked
“fast track” legislation that would allow Obama to get such complex
trade treaties through Congress with little debate.  With Mitch
McConnell replacing Reid in January, effective liberal Democratic
opposition to a fast-track treatment for TPP will evaporate, leaving
progressives hard-pressed to stop this corporate power grab.

Even some Tea Party Republicans at the grassroots level are suspicious
of corporate flight and “free trade” legislation, as demonstrated in the
1990s by Ross Perot’s crusade against NAFTA; and this creates at least
the potential for a truly “bipartisan” campaign to stop “fast track”
authority for TPP approval.  Yet it remains to be seen whether
socialists, liberals, green activists, unions and grassroots Republicans
can mobilize enough popular resistance to keep corporate-friendly
Democrats and the Republican leadership from pushing through TPP by
2017.

Other possible casualties of the GOP’s big win this year are the U.S.
Postal Service, Postal Service workers and their unions, and the federal
workforce in general.  As Melanie Trottman and Kris Maher reported in
the Nov. 6 *Washington Post,* some labor observers are saying the
election results “could send a message to politicians that they can take
on labor and survive,” leading to “more efforts to rein in
public-employee pensions, curb collective-bargaining rights for federal
workers, and push right-to-work laws that allow employees in unionized
workplaces to opt out of paying union dues.”

For federal workers and postal workers in general, the outlook seems
especially grim.  The new GOP chairman of the Senate Homeland Security
and Government Affairs Committee is Sen. Ron Johnson, a former plastics
manufacturer from Wisconsin and a Tea Party Republican who issued an
alarmist report on federal deficit reduction in 2011.

According to a Nov. 10 *Post* article by Joe Davison, Johnson expects
government deficit spending to total \$127 trillion over the next 30
years. Johnson’s 2011 report therefore recommended reducing the other
federal workforce by 10 percent and cutting the number of federal
contractors by 15 percent.  In addition, Davidson reports, the report
has suggested “eliminating the Office of Special Counsel, the Merit
Systems Protection Board, the Office of Government Ethics and the
Federal Labor Relations Authority, all of which deal directly with
federal employees.”

Davidson’s *Post* article further quotes the Senator as saying that “I
really don’t think that the public-sector employees should be
unionized,” and as advocating that the Post Service should go through
bankruptcy proceedings, which “really would turn the post office into a
private entity.”

Given the reality of labor give-backs in the private sector over the
years, where health-care and retirement benefits have been repeatedly
reduced, Johnson has reportedly said it is “unrealistic” for
public-sector employees to “believe they are immune from modifications
in their pay and benefit packages.”

According to Davidson’s “Federal Diary” piece in the *Post,* Johnson is
saying he will look for areas of bipartisan agreement in his committee,
so his most extreme ideas on the federal workforce are unlikely to
become law overnight.  Yet his chairmanship of the committee does mean
that federal employee unions will face a very challenging political
environment when the new Congress convenes in January.

Still another long-term challenge for progressives, democratic
socialists and even moderate liberals that the new Congress will present
lies in the area of presidential appointments, both to the federal
bureaucracy and to the federal judiciary.  Mainstream media commentators
expect the Republicans to block many if not most Obama nominees to the
federal courts, in particular, which could mean that conservative
Republicans get to stack the entire federal court system with rightwing,
business-friendly judges for decades to come.

During the darkest days of the American Revolution, patriot Tom Paine
wrote that “these are the times that try men’s souls.”  Paine should
have added, “and women’s souls, too,” or simply written “human souls”
and had done with it, if he hadn’t fallen pretty to the sexism of his
times.  But DSA members and other progressives in the United States,
whether we’re trying to work inside or outside of the Democratic Party
and the electoral arena, ought to remember and embrace Paine’s
sentiment.

For democratic socialists, the inconvenient truth is that no matter how
much we might have wished it otherwise, and no matter how differently
Marx may have envisioned things turning out in 1848, the struggle for a
humane and democratic socialism has been a long, hard slog that has
lasted for more than a century now.  In the more developed capitalist
societies of Western Europe and the United States, there have been no
sudden revolutionary breaks that led to success – at least not yet – and
the mass of working people have yet to declare themselves all to be
socialists.

Especially in advanced capitalist countries of the West, as Antonio
Gramsci argued in his *Prison Notebooks,* the fight for socialism has
become a “war of position” comparable to the grisly and endless trench
warfare of World War I, not a “war of movement” comparable to some of
Napoleon’s lightning military strikes in the early 1800s.   What
socialists require to win a “war of position,” a la Gramsci’s phrase, is
a mixture of determination, movement-building and organization-building,
plus the patience to keep fighting for decades.

In a war of position, as opposed to a war of movement, important battles
may be lost, but the side that has the most determination, the best
organization, and the most success in identifying and mobilizing
resources has a long-term chance of winning the war.  I think democratic
socialists would do well to remember that as we face what could be a
series of discouraging and defensive fights in the months and years
ahead.

 

[*Good Reads for Socialists, December
2014*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-december-2014/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

The Black Friday demo at the H Street Walmart, including many from Jobs
with Justice, as portrayed in words and pictures by the excellent blog
*DCi*st:
[*http://dcist.com/2014/11/protesters\_gather\_outside\_dc\_walmar.php*](http://dcist.com/2014/11/protesters_gather_outside_dc_walmar.php)

How much trouble are unions in after the 2014 election debacle? Tom
Edsall’s roundup in the NYT has really, really sobering details:
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/19/opinion/republicans-sure-love-to-hate-unions.html?ref=opinion*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/19/opinion/republicans-sure-love-to-hate-unions.html?ref=opinion)

Another perspective on the same problem: Are the struggles for minimum
wage increases and living wages sidestepping the need for workers to
gain and wield “worker power” through permanent organization? A longtime
campaigner for these causes reflects.
[*http://www.thenation.com/article/191513/why-living-wage-laws-are-not-enough-and-minimum-wage-laws-arent-either?utm\_source=facebook&utm\_medium=socialflow*](http://www.thenation.com/article/191513/why-living-wage-laws-are-not-enough-and-minimum-wage-laws-arent-either?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=socialflow)

Sam Pizzigati’s weekly blog for the Institute for Policy Studies, “Too
Much,” never fails to illuminate – with in-depth studies of inequality
as well as blood-boiling portraits of the latest corporate excess and
“Petulant Plutocrat of the Week.” The latest episode leads with the
hypocritical behavior of Texas congressman Jeb Hensarling, who rails
against Obama’s alleged lawbreaking with his immigration order while
quietly… well, you’ll see at
[*http://toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html*](http://toomuchonline.org/tmweekly.html)

 

*Want more “Good Reads for Socialists”? **Better send us some**. This is
supposed to reflect the wide reading of our readership, not some
canonical listicle. Send proposals of recent articles to*
[**woodlanham@gmail.com**](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com)*. To be useful,
they must have links unshielded by paywalls.*

[*Hagler Recounts Election Manipulation, Importance of Housing
Issues*](http://dsadc.org/hagler-recounts-election-manipulation-importance-of-housing-issues/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

*By David Duhalde, Dave Richardson and Woody Woodruff*

Insights into the way money and power manage electoral politics in
Washington, D.C., came to the Socialist Salon in November via Rev.
Graylan Hagler, senior pastor of Plymouth United Church of Christ, an
at-large City Council candidate in the recent plebiscite.

Hagler, an Independent candidate who came in behind several other
Independents in a race won by Democrat Anita Bonds and Independent
Elissa Silverman, pointed out that of around 100,000 votes cast in the
crowded at-large Council race, “60,000 were undervotes.” Those voters,
who could vote for two candidates because two seats were available, cast
a vote for only one of the candidates. The Democratic establishment, he
said, had called for a “bullet vote” to ensure that Bonds, an
undistinguished legislator who had been appointed to a seat made vacant
by a prosecution for corruption, would win an electoral victory.

The stakes in the race were illustrated, he said, by the comparative
silence about the real issues in the campaign – housing, poverty and the
need for a living wage, and gentrification. The decline of really
*public* housing as both a concept and a concrete fact in the District
is illustrated by Barry Farms. The Farms, originally a grant to newly
freed slaves, is now a victim of the elite-managed cycle into
profiteering and out of public hands. Public housing that is judiciously
neglected by both government and its alleged private-sector allies
becomes vulnerable to takeover and gentrification by the always-lurking
private sector predators.

Hagler observed, for instance, that in areas targeted for redevelopment
police protection was virtually absent until the developers started to
buy up the property.  Once they had the property, the police came back
and cleaned up the neighborhood *before* any new development took
place.  Clearly this could have happened in a way that benefited the
original occupants but it didn’t.

Hagler recounted the dismantling of public housing as a program and an
idea stemming from the 1992 imposition of a financial authority or
“Control Board” on the District by Congress, punishing the voters for
returning the recently-deceased Marion Barry, Jr. to the mayoralty after
his drug conviction. Anthony Williams, director of the Control Board and
Barry’s successor as mayor, systematically turned over the city’s
affordable housing stock to the private sector for management and
redevelopment, especially through land-assembly of contiguous vacant
residences. A persistent joint strategy of government and developers was
to allow communities and neighborhoods to deteriorate until they could
be characterized as requiring redevelopment in order to save them.

“Racial politics are class politics,” Hagler asserted, likening the
business-based Federal City Council to a White Citizens Council that
stays above the fray and leaves the dirty work to Klan-like elements. He
observed that D.C., alone among Eastern seaboard cities from Boston to
Richmond, had no neighborhoods that were poor *and* white.

Hagler contrasted that steady corporatization of the housing stock with
the confrontational politics of the Community for Creative Nonviolence
(CCNV), which in the 1980s advocated for the homeless with tactics that
prefigured the Occupy movement (and had longer-lasting consequences and
results).

Asked how neighborhoods could be improved without gentrification, Hagler
observed that organization for action was a prerequisite, along with
exposure of the moneyed interests behind public policy.

The Socialist Salon is a monthly discussion meeting of Metro DC
Democratic Socialists of America. It generally meets the third Thursday
of the month at 6:30 in a local restaurant. Check the [*Meetup
page*](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/206907002/) for updates on
the next Socialist Salon

[*HUMAN CAPITAL, the film*](http://dsadc.org/human-capital-the-film/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

*By Dan Adkins*

The film *Human Capital* starts near the end of its story where we see a
waiter trying to serve and get home for the holiday.  Going home, you
see a careening SUV that knocks this waiter/bicyclist off the road.  The
film then has scenes from different personal views leading up to the
tragedy.  The views come from two families brought together by their
children and their mutual lust for money.  One family, led by a hedge
fund manager, is quite well off but even for them the market
fluctuates.  The other father is looking to cash in on this new
friendship with the rich family.  Three different views bring in new
relationships and you might not guess the ending.  It is interesting
that only one person in the film works, and he gets run over.  *Human
Capital* is a film of desire, greed, and the value of life in a
community where finance capital propels people’s lives and labor is
disposable or an afterthought.

The film is very well done with superb acting, dialogue and plot.  The
director is Paolo Virzi, who has specialized in comedies but has now
expanded to drama.  This Italian film is drawn from an American book
called *Human Capital: A Novel* by Stephen Amidon, who lives in New
England and Italy.  The book was highly acclaimed by the *Washington
Post* in 2004.  The book and the film’s main technical flaw, according
to some reviewers, is an inaccurate account of the mechanics of hedge
funds and explanations of risk.  However, these inaccuracies might have
added to the drama and conflict of the film.

There are many definitions of “human capital” but the one identified in
the film’s credits is from the insurance industry and is used to
quantify the potential earnings of a life.  This meaning can be used in
evaluating the value of a wrongful death and to identify the waiter’s
monetary loss to his family.

 

The film is to be released in February or sooner and some previews are
already out.

 

[*Living in Poverty: The Insider’s
View*](http://dsadc.org/living-in-poverty-the-insiders-view/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

*By Bill Mosley*

Review of *Hand to Mouth:  Living in Bootstrap America*.  By Linda
Tirado.  G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 2014.  196 pp.

 

Barbara Ehrenreich’s 2001 book *Nickel and Dimed:  On (Not) Getting By
in America* provided readers with a powerful, witty, first-hand look at
the struggles of low-wage workers shut out of the American dream.  And
yet, as Ehrenreich took on the guise of a housecleaner or Walmart
associate in order to gather material, I couldn’t help yearning for the
voice of a real low-wage worker to supplement that of Ehrenreich, who
could resume her relatively comfortable life as a writer once her
research was completed.

Now we have such a voice: that of Linda Tirado.  Her book *Hand to
Mouth:  Living in Bootstrap America*, is an alternately angry, funny,
profane (often all of these at the same time) and always eloquent look
at her own struggles trying to raise a family and stay one step ahead of
bill collectors while lurching from one dead-end job to another.  Tirado
got “discovered” when she posted a pointed reply on an online forum to a
query about why poor people often act in self-destructive ways.  Her
mini-essay went viral:  It appeared in *The Nation, Forbes* and the
*Huffington Post* and led to an offer to expand her thoughts into book
form.  (Ehrenreich, a DSA honorary chair, generously contributed the
book’s forward).

Tirado draws from her own experiences to illustrate why the cycle of
poverty is so hard to break.  Working two low-paying, part-time jobs, as
Tirado has done, is a treadmill of driving, loss of sleep, absence from
home and the constant fear that one of her employers will suddenly upset
the juggling act by changing her schedule and forcing her to lose one of
her jobs.  Poor living conditions and poor diet make it harder to hold
down any job while exacerbating health problems – which, even in
Obamacare America, require funds that the poor often don’t have. 
“Poverty is fucking expensive,” she says, and provides ample
illustration of how the poor pay a premium for their poverty through
interest on payday loans, lack of ready cash for economical bulk-buying,
and other catch-22s seemingly designed to make the poor even poorer.

This being largely a personal account and not a policy analysis, Tirado
is stronger on how the poor get that way – and get poorer – than what to
do about alleviating poverty.   But she does asks the non-poor to take
the first step – to try to understand the poor and the difficulties they
face rather than mindlessly criticize them as dysfunctional or
irresponsible.

Perhaps Tirado will encourage other low-wage Americans to come forward
with their stories.  Whether or not they do, *Hand to Mouth* is a
powerful and valuable addition to understanding of the real barriers
poor Americans face in their effort to break out of poverty.

[*Metro DC DSA Plans for the Coming
Year*](http://dsadc.org/metro-dc-dsa-plans-for-the-coming-year/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

*By Kurt Stand*

Members of Metro DC DSA’s Steering Committee together with active
members of the Local have decided to make the “Fight for Fifteen,” – the
campaign for an across-the-board \$15 minimum wage in our region – to be
the priority for our work agenda in the coming year.

This decision was made by the 11 participants at a strategy committee
meeting held on Sunday, November 23. Details of our work within the
“Fight for Fifteen” campaign will be discussed and put to a membership
vote in an early 2015 membership meeting.  Other potential work in the
coming year may include gathering signatures to encourage a potential
Bernie Sanders presidential campaign and support for the initiatives of
Jobs with Justice. We also will build on the relationships developed
last year in local electoral activity through our endorsements of Andy
Shallal for Mayor, and Rev. Graylan Hagler and Eugene Puryear for City
Council in DC as well as the campaigns members took part in as
individuals in suburban Maryland and Northern Virginia.

The “socialism,” in our socialist activity will continue to be present
in our work – as demonstrated in Seattle and elsewhere, the fight for a
just, democratic public policy on incomes is socialist to the core. Our
monthly Socialist Salons will continue to explore different aspects of
socialist theory and practice, both at the local and at the national &
international levels.  Themes in the coming year will include – among
other topics – socialist feminism, immigration struggles, the
African-American radical tradition, and environmental justice. And the
“social” nature of socialism will still be present through our
once-a-month “Happy Hours,” which now includes a regular gathering in
Northern Virginia in addition to the gathering held in DC. Our monthly
online journal *Washington Socialist* will continue to bring these
together by reporting on the work of the local and its members as well
as providing a forum for “think” pieces on political, theoretical and
cultural themes.  Membership meetings will henceforth incorporate
presentations on arenas of on-going or potential engagement.  The local
will conduct a survey early in 2015 to better determine the views,
energy level and interests of all members, including those who pay dues
but are not otherwise active.

Discussion at the strategy meeting also addressed the need to address
members’ concern with both national/international issues and local
community struggles in order to better balance our work throughout the
area – a breakdown of our 208 national DSA members locally indicates
that 44 percent live in Maryland, 33 percent in DC proper, and 23
percent in Virginia.  A report on national DSA helped place in context
the work breakdown of the Local’s activity last year and the contents of
the *Washington* *Socialist* indicated what we already knew about the
extensive work we have done.  Written reports detailed the extensive
activity Metro DC DSA engaged in last year as well as the wide-ranging
themes addressed in the *Washington Socialist* – these providing a firm
basis upon which to build for the future.  Although the national
political picture is bleak, the meeting was conducted in a spirit of
hopefulness and the spirit of determination to do our part in bringing
about much needed change to our society.

[*Progressive Maryland Faces Political Challenges, Expands Suburban Md.
Organizing*](http://dsadc.org/progressive-maryland-faces-political-challenges-expands-suburban-md-organizing/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

*By Woody Woodruff*

[*Progressive Maryland*](http://progressivemaryland.org/), a
longstanding left organization in the state with deep labor ties, is
coming out of a somewhat fallow period and adding significant staff just
as progressives wake up to the reality of a Republican executive in this
allegedly blue state.

Tuesday, Nov. 18, members old and recent gathered at the IBEW Local 26
headquarters in Lanham to mark the organization’s addition of an
assistant director and a commitment to organize in Prince George’s
County.

Kate Planco Waybright, Progressive Maryland’s executive director,
acknowledged to a crowd of more than 100 that the organization had a
reputation as a Montgomery County-oriented outfit, and vowed that Prince
George’s would get equal attention.

Waybright’s new No. 2 is Larry Stafford Jr., who had served as leader of
the Prince George’s Young Democrats and had a gaggle of associates in
the seats at the meeting.

Waybright and Stafford said the poor turnout in Prince George’s and
Montgomery – largely blamed for the loss of the governor’s race – was
galvanizing their efforts.  Arguing for renewed organizing starting now,
Stafford said “we can’t just wait for another election.”

Progressive Maryland will resume the fight for paid sick leave for all
workers (twice turned down the legislature) as well as reforms to
eliminate tax loopholes enjoyed by out-of-state corporations and
reversing the weakening of the estate tax. Also on the agenda: a
redistricting commission, a continuing battle to reverse the Citizens
United decision and a concurrent fight for public financing in state
elections.

Metro Washington Labor Council President Jos Williams fired up the crowd
with his statement that with the election of Republican Larry Hogan to
the governorship, “the \[deep Blue Maryland\] bubble was burst” and the
task now is “reclaiming our state.”

Waybright said that the Republican victory “will make our work a little
more difficult” but suggested it could increase participation as well.
Stafford, introducing himself with an account of how a supportive,
active government had enabled him to get an education despite a tough
background, warned “there are forces that are trying to take all of that
back.”

Progressive Maryland counts 23,000-plus individual members and 30
affiliated organizations and has offices in Silver Spring and Baltimore.
Eleven union locals, the DC Building and Construction Trades Council,
the state and two county NAACP organizations, several peace and justice
organizations, Maryland NOW and several religiously based social justice
groups are among the organizational affiliates.

[*Sleep and Accept or Awake and Sing: Performing Clifford Odets
Today*](http://dsadc.org/sleep-and-accept-or-awake-and-sing-performing-clifford-odets-today/)

Monday, December 1st, 2014

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2014**

*By Kurt Stand*

**Theatre as Past**

Knowing the end point of a given historical process can make the outcome
of prior social developments appear inevitable; the choices left
unfulfilled along the way dismissed as irrelevant or marginal.  Yet that
assumes history has an end point, ignoring the reality that existing
relationships are themselves in a constant state of flow.  Progress may
look to have been inevitable for those whose family trajectory took a
path out of poverty and toward comparative prosperity, family stability,
a settled state of being; the conflicts of Depression-era life may
appear to belong to a different world or be the fate of others less
fortunate (or less worthy).  The truth that such apparent gains may
prove hollow, or that setbacks to challenges of political or social
conventions from one period may provide the soil for subsequent
re-emergence of such challenges — the truth that settled “facts” may be
far from settled — is then lost.  Whether the past is depicted as frozen
or as still full of life are alternatives that can be set before us in
the theatre, rendering revivals pointed or pointless.

As was the case with the just-closed Olney Theatre production in
Montgomery County of Clifford Odets’ 1935 play, *Awake and Sing*. 
Groundbreaking in its day, the challenge for the director and cast was
to give it a contemporary relevance.  It was a challenge not met; what
the audience saw was a museum piece.  Perhaps providing a glimpse of a
life those in attendance recalled from their own now-distant childhood
or heard in stories their parents or grandparents told, the performance
allowed, encouraged, a sweet feeling of memory for times gone by,
pleasurable even when watching painful scenes.  Enjoyable, certainly,
moving at times, but far removed from the anger that comes through in
every line of dialogue as written.  Efforts were made in the stage
setting and display of artifacts throughout the building to be true to
the original significance of the play and locate it historically; the
attempts fell flat because of a superficial view of history that
presents the past in one-dimensional terms.  A superficial view
encapsulated by the notion that relevance comes by depicting the family
drama as “timeless,” thereby rendering it meaningless as all family
dramas (on stage, in life) take place in time.  In consequence, nothing
in the production spoke to the emotional impact it had on audiences in
the 1930s, no attempt was made to have an equivalent impact on audiences
today.

**Past as Prologue**

Social conflicts reached a high-water mark in the US in the years
leading up to World War I.  The war and its aftermath left many of the
radical hopes contained in political movements of the time unfulfilled,
replaced by a celebration of individualism, “Americanism,” the culture
of celebrity and the worship of material gain — even though millions
were left behind in this supposed march of progress.  A questioning of
the emptiness and pain contained in all the glitter gave rise to a
rebirth of critical writing during the 1920s.  This was what underlined
the rejection of such “progress” by those who went off to Paris — Ernest
Hemingway, Gertrude Stein, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Kay Boyle, John Dos
Passos, H.D.. to name but a few; it was behind the bitter realism of
writers like Sinclair Lewis, Dorothy Parker, Ring Lardner, Edna St.
Vincent Millay, Stephen Vincent Benet, William Carlos Williams; behind
the upsurge of the Harlem Renaissance and the work of Langston Hughes,
Claude McKay, Zora Neale Hurston, Nella Larsen, James Weldon Johnson and
many more.

Unlike in previous periods, the theatre joined the other arts in giving
voice to suppressed or ignored truths.  Up the early 20th century,
American stage had primarily offered works derivative of European models
or provided uncritical comic/melodramatic entertainment without pretense
to anything deeper.  Pioneering plays by Maxwell Anderson, Laurence
Stallings, Susan Glaspell, and, most significantly, Eugene O’Neill,
brought life to drama, depicting the intersection of personal/family
conflict in the context of societal tensions thereby providing a
critique of the oppressions contained in everyday life.  All this was in
the air when the Depression brought the illusion of endless paths toward
prosperity to a screeching halt, and set a framework that allowed the
best of the new writing to connect individual fate with social
conditions while engaging in the search to find hope where hopelessness
was all around.

And perhaps none did so more effectively than Clifford Odets, who
breathed in the air of 1920s literary and theatrical developments
alongside the conventions of Yiddish theatre — where melodrama and
comedy were used to depict the tension between tradition as
self-protection and tradition as self-repression, in the process
expressing the inner-tension of immigrant life.   Odets combined these
various currents in *Awake and Sing* via its depiction of tenement
family life, in its telling a story through conversation in everyday
speech, in its rootedness amongst the Jewish poor (it was the first
Broadway play with exclusively Jewish cast).  By combining the various
currents of theatrical and literary innovation, that rootedness did not
isolate the Jewish immigrant experience as singular; rather, it allowed
for points of connection, as other immigrants, other audiences, could
hear the language of their lives and conflicts.  Though such techniques
and subject matter were to become staples on and off Broadway in
following decades, it was new in Odets time — new to commercial theatre,
and because of showing the political in the personal, new to radical
theatre in the US; mirroring forms of expression adopted by dramatists
such as O’Casey in Ireland, Brecht in Germany, Tretyakov in the Soviet
Union.

**The Play**

The setting of the story told is the Bronx apartment of an impoverished
family fearful of losing what little they have, while each member dreams
different dreams of a way up and forward.  Caught between ideals of
socialism that seem unable to compete with the allure of glamour and
wealth that Hollywood and magazine advertising suggest capitalism can
offer; caught between the lure of success defined by material goods and
the reality of a scramble every day simply to make ends meet, anger
becomes a weapon against surrender into passivity.  The world Odets
depicts is anything but benign; all the characters are living a life
where a precarious security holding the wolf at bay is purchased at
tremendous cost.  A cost paid in a bitterness that trumps love. 
Children and marriage are seen as enormous burdens, especially marriage
that doesn’t help move the family up the economic ladder.  Women are the
chief victims of that process, marriage in such a context being depicted
as nearly the respectable side of forced prostitution, a vehicle to move
even one small notch up the ladder, a means to prevent sliding down
further.  Powerless when facing the world outside, power is exercised by
a cruelty in family life, a cruelty that stems from crushed dreams and
reflects the necessity of implacability against the outside currents of
instability.  Life as lived by those characters and, by extension, to
the audiences who first responded to the performances on stage, calls
for passion not charity’s compassion.

Adding to the power of the play, as written, was its indictment of an
older generation who were charged with having given in to those
pressures.  The generational anger evident in every scene is central —
and how could it not be?   For the Depression’s young people, the bust
following the boom greeting them as they reached adulthood was laid at
the door of their parents’ and grandparents’ defeats, illusions,
failure.   With all doors closed to those just starting out on life’s
journey, that anger should have been palpable —  yet was a conflict lost
in the Olney production because it conflicted with  the nostalgia of the
performance (for nostalgia softens memory – familial or historical – and
so softens a sense of pain).  Odets’ indictment is not one-sided; he
makes clear why the older generation acted as they did, why the mother
makes harsh choices that hurt those she is trying to protect, rejects
the socialism that she sees as simply another encumbrance in a life
already filled with wasted sacrifice.  The indictment is also political;
the grandfather in the play is a socialist, a reader of Marx, a militant
who despairs as he sees his children and grandchildren enticed by dreams
of material gain.  Yet, he indicts himself too, his words have little
meaning because his socialism became abstracted from life, a socialism
of dreams removed from action, a socialism undone by the too many
personal compromises along the road – and so he has become a useless old
man, with old dreams that do not speak to this new world.  Taking
comfort only in listening to records of Italian opera sung by Enrico
Caruso, he has refused risk.

Real change, for Odets however, involves real risk – when the
granddaughter in the play abandons her child and “arranged” husband for
a relationship of choice, there is no assumption that those choices will
lead to happiness.  Instead, her acts are an assertion that personal
meaning can only be found by willingness to act cognizant of cost. 
Costs willingly accepted are the only path out of the personal surrender
that leads to desperation manifested by lashing out at those near and
dear.  So too, when the grandson decides to stay his ground and resist
by organizing, he both is and is not following in the grandfather’s
footsteps; for him socialism is a means to act, not dream.  Odets that
is, was trying to challenge his audience, to make his theatre-goers feel
uncomfortable and question their own choices/compromises, just as his
earlier play, *Waiting for Lefty*, was aimed at challenging audience
passivity.

**Present as Prologue**

And contemporary theatre is still capable of doing the same.  Two
performances in the 2013-2014 season at Washington DC’s  Woolly Mammoth
theatre provide examples, witness the appropriately long-named work by
Jackie Sibblies Drury:  *We Are Proud to Present: A Presentation About
the Herero of Namibia, Formerly Known as South-West Africa, From the
German Sudwestafrika, Between the Years 1884-1915*.  The fully scripted
play is performed by six actors — three men, three women — as though an
improvisational exercise in how to tell a story, how to stage a story. 
Doing so, each confronts the others and the lies, myths and exercises in
avoidance that most people use to escape discomfort — especially when
race is the subject.  The characters, nameless throughout, have only the
letters of German soldiers home — banal letters, filled with
trivialities — to tell the story of the genocide.   No written records
from the slaughtered Herero people exist, therefore accounts of what
took place — even empathetic or sympathetic accounts — come from outside
the experience.

When victims are not allowed to tell their own stories, the tragedies
they undergo are not seen for themselves — a point brought home when one
actor’s claim that what happened in Southwest Africa was a precursor to
the Holocaust is challenged in anger.   The pain of oppression wrought
in colonial Africa was awful enough in its own terms without having to
be compared to the pain suffered in Europe.  Similarly, when one (white)
character attempts to demonstrate sensitivity by speaking about a
painful family memory of witnessed racist violence, he is upbraided; it
is not his painful memory that is relevant, but that of the victims. 
The barbs the actors throw at each other are barbs thrown at the
audience, the conversation on stage about stories and truth, about
written records and collective memories, about “plays” and history come
back again and again — telling the story of the past to regain impact or
telling stories to avoid uncomfortable realities.  The seeming
improvisational telling of the play adds to this, indicating how
conversations can move past each other, unintentionally reproducing the
prejudices of society that lead double standards in everyday life to go
unheard. Linking all is the recognition of how the experience of racism
colors the way the past is seen.  And not just the past: the play was
staged in the wake of Trayvon Martin’s murder and conversation was
encouraged to grapple with the meaning of George Zimmerman’s acquittal.

Mike Daisey’s ***American Utopias***, also performed at the Woolly,
directly moves from the world on stage to a confrontation to the world
outside.    Daisey’s one-man show begins as a running commentary on his
personal experience joining in two versions of American utopia.  He
takes part in the countercultural Burning Man festival in Nevada, a
celebration of self-reliance in community that allows a brief moment of
escape from the everyday world of work and bills and order, a world all
will rejoin immediately thereafter.  He next narrates a family trip to
Disney World with its vision of order and place created by turning
dreams into commodities, Utopia as something that can be stage-managed
through masks and play, as something the market can offer for sale.  
Sarcastic and cutting about these two, Daisey challenges illusions and
self-conceits people bring to them.   Though he tempers that, he also
offers an homage to the honesty many bring to these, their respective
sense of belief and striving toward a means of belonging.  Daisey
condemns the lacks, economic and social, not the various searches for a
truer life, however misguided they might be.

And that leads to his contrast with a more pointed Utopia:  Occupy Wall
Street, a utopia that challenged the system at its roots and so was
judged a menace to be crushed.   His sympathy and solidarity with those
who took part is balanced by his own inability to commit, for unlike
Burning Man or Disney World, he did not join in.  Failing to turn
beliefs into action, Daisey did not set foot in Zuccotti Park, and so,
like many good people ever and again, standing on the sidelines allowed
reaction to regain the upper hand.  Thus Daisy turns his non-involvement
into a self-indictment, an indictment made all the more real when he
spoke of the beatings and arrests suffered by those who took part, his
commentary on police violence enhanced by video images of the Park being
forcibly cleared.

Non-involvement, watching from the sidelines, is itself a form of
complicity — a washing of hands, an acceptance rationalized by the
belief that nothing can be done — thus his self-indictment becomes a
shared indictment with those in his audience who similarly observed and
did nothing.  A point he drew home during his performance, by leading
people outside the theatre and — from a street corner — urging
theatre-goers to break down the gap between good thoughts, staged
performances, and the world of oppression and repression, urging each to
take action to reclaim public space, take risks, act to change our
world.

**Past, Present and Future Choices**

Which brings us back to *Awake and Sing*.   One means to recapture the
spirit of the play would be to put it in the setting of an immigrant
family in the United States of today; for the world is similarly
exploitative to those who live at the margins now as compared to then. 
The difficulty, however, would be to avoid the distancing — the seeing
of other’s pain only in terms of them being the other, only in terms of
pain.  Here one can recall Richard Wright’s self-critique of his first
collection of short stories, *Uncle Tom’s Children* — for they were
stories that made readers weep from afar.  And so he followed it with
*Native Son*, which doesn’t allow its central character to turn into an
object of unalloyed sympathy.  Rather the honesty of its picture forces
readers to confront rather than patronize.  The novel’s central
character Bigger Thomas is trapped in a world defined by poverty and
racism; the link to most of those who read the novel is not his world of
limitations, it is a shared sense of limitation, of walls and barriers,
that define the life of most.  It is a claustrophobia experienced by all
characters in *We Are Proud to Present*…, a claustrophobia Daisey
brought home in the telling of the ring around Zuccotti Park as the
police charged.

Trapped by student debt, trapped by jobs with no security, trapped by a
system that still offers no sense of belonging apart from that which can
be bought by wealth is today’s reality; Occupy spoke to that sense and
so touched a nerve that allowed it so spread so swiftly. And that sense
of claustrophobia, of tenement life, of life without choices and
possibilities, rings true in every line in Odets play and is why it
touched a nerve of recognition in its day — and could in our day too. 
Claustrophobia is bred by the closed doors of our winner-take-all system
with no way out. The competition at the root of capitalism engenders a
permanent state of insecurity that enables other forms of injustice to
thrive, that encourages a live for today not tomorrow mindset.  That
insecurity can set jobs against health and the environment, can welcome
job growth in the form of prison expansion and overseas war.  Today’s
radicalism is as much a search for meaning as it is for social justice
as it is for economic justice — at once, the same and different from
strivings in the past.

There is nothing wrong with a work of theatre aimed at giving an
audience pleasure, nothing wrong with enjoying an evening’s performance
as a form of relaxation and leaving it as that.  Yet there is also
nothing wrong with a theatre production, with any work of art, making
its audience work.  Perhaps it is only our alienation from work itself
that makes it difficult for many to connect pleasure on a night out and
being challenged to think and act.  It is a connection, however, as
central to artistic values that challenge conventional wisdom as it is
to political movements that similarly push against the limits of what is
deemed possible, deemed acceptable.  Intersecting political and cultural
challenges, celebrating work and critical thought, is the best way to
keep hope alive in our troubled times.

Odets lived out the choices, the risks, thrown at his audience in his
early plays.  Eventually leaving New York for Hollywood, he found
material success, but though he produced good writing in his later
years, nothing matched his early brilliance — he lost his connection
with his audience and was unable to re-establish a new one.  So too, the
risk of political engagement caught up with him.  Angry at McCarthyism,
defiant in words, he eventually gave in and testified before the House
Un-American  Activities Committee.  Unlike others who did so, however,
Odets did not justify himself.  According to most accounts, he died a
broken man trapped by the system he hated.  It is a story that gives
more, not less, meaning to *Awake and Sing*, for it foreshadows the
difficult road any would have to follow to escape the impositions of a
heartless system.   Trying and failing is far more meaningful than a
life of non-engagement, for its leaves in its wake a legacy upon which
others can build.  That is the meaning of the grandfather’s admonition
which we fail to heed at a cost:

“That is why I tell you — Do!  Do what is in you.  Do what is in your
heart and you carry in yourself a revolution”
