***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from December 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[Metro DC DSA’s December 2015 Newsletter: National DSA convention in the
rear-view mirror and next steps for
2016](http://dsadc.org/metro-dc-dsas-december-2015-newsletter-national-dsa-convention-in-the-rear-view-mirror-and-next-steps-for-2016/)

Wednesday, December 2nd, 2015

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the December issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
monthly email newsletter of the Metro DC local of Democratic Socialists
of America**.

Our nine-member delegation returned in mid-November from the biannual
national DSA convention and our recollections and responses are part of
this newsletter, with more to come. But first, what’s to come this
month.

**DSADC’s DECEMBER** – First up is the **DSA Book Group**, meeting Dec.
6 at the Kogod Courtyard, National Portrait Gallery at 8^th^ and F
Streets (Gallery exit of the Gallery Place metrorail station). The group
meets at 3 p.m. to discuss Kristen Ghodsee’s book, *The Left Side of
History*. [More
information](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/226224515/) on our
meetup page.

Our [**general membership
meeting**](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/226750750/) is Sunday,
Dec. 13, 2 to 3:30 p.m. in room A-9 at Martin Luther King Jr. main
library, 901 G St. NW, also Gallery Place metrorail station Gallery
exit.\
Watch this space (after it turns up on the website) for the latest news
on our **Socialist Salon**, which would be the third Thursday, Dec. 17 –
unless it is moved to accommodate holiday schedules.\
As the year wanes, a [**DSA Happy
Hour**](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/rwltglytqbnc/) is scheduled
Wednesday, Dec. 30 at 6:30 p.m. for Luna Grille, 1301 Connecticut Ave.
NW

**The Convention:** There’s a fine overall report from Atlanta’s Barbara
Joye in the [Democratic Left
blogspace](http://www.dsausa.org/dsa_convention_new_strategy_for_a_new_era_dl?recruiter_id=2)
on the events in Bolivar, Pa.\
The strategy document, as described in our last issue, was
democratically demolished and resurrected over the course of nearly two
years. Its passage at the convention – under the parliamentarian’s gavel
of our former DC comrade Tim Sears, now of Seattle – was by acclamation.
The drafting committee’s final product following the sense of the
convention is likely to be on the National DSA website shortly. More
from our delegation…

**IN THIS ISSUE:**

The DC delegation’s experiences and impressions of the convention
include:

“Living Our Strategy:” Merrill Miller’s observations about the
democratic and human qualities of the convention and its people. [Read
complete
article](http://dsadc.org/living-our-strategy-not-just-speaking-it-thoughts-on-the-dsa-2015-convention/)

Andy Feeney’s observations weave the physical setting of the Antiochian
Village retreat center and the business of the convention. [Read
complete article](http://dsadc.org/convention-impressions/)\
One of the many substantive workshops at the convention, an evolutionary
history of socialist feminism, was co-led by Carolyn Byerly of DC and
Peg Strobel of Chicago. Woody Woodruff reports. [Read complete
article](http://dsadc.org/convention-workshop-on-feminism-yields-prospects-for-improvement-issues-of-practice/)

**UNCONVENTIONAL STUFF**:

The attacks in Paris have brought foreign relations and security back to
the headlines. Bill Mosley discusses the neoliberal world’s reaction,
our perspective and its evolution. [Read complete
article](http://dsadc.org/after-paris-the-right-road-to-combating-terrorism/)\
Varieties of co-ops and worker-managed enterprises are part of our
emerging perspective on the “solidarity economy.” Dan Adkins discusses
unionized government co-ops, a longtime model that has possibilities for
our future.[ Read complete
article](http://dsadc.org/government-linked-co-ops-a-once-and-future-model/)

**BOOKS AND ARTS– REVIEWS**

A documentary film on the struggles of a Honduran community to create
its own health care system under the rule of a US-sanctioned right-wing
coup “government” was shown in DC recently. Kurt Stand was there and
tells both of the film and the participants who spoke. [Read complete
article](http://dsadc.org/health-medicine-and-social-change-a-review-of-the-film-revolutionary-medicine-the-story-of-the-first-garifuna-hospital/)\
Michael Moore’s new movie, “Where to Invade Next?,” gets an early look
from Dan Adkins. [Read complete
article](http://dsadc.org/where-to-invade-next-review-of-a-michael-moore-film/)

Andrew Cockburn’s scathing new book, *Kill Chain*, about high-tech
warfare, is reviewed by David Richardson.[ Read complete
article](http://dsadc.org/the-us-militarys-crippling-obsession-with-high-tech-death/)

**GOOD READS** – as always, a selection of web-accessible articles on
the left that you may have missed. [Read complete
article.](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-5/)

Y**ou can read these and other past articles in the *Washington
Socialist* on our website where they are archived,**
[**dsadc.org**](http://dsadc.org/)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
<woodlanham@gmail.com>.

[*“Where to Invade Next”—review of a Michael Moore
film*](http://dsadc.org/where-to-invade-next-review-of-a-michael-moore-film/)

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* December 2015**

*** **By Daniel Adkins*

* *Michael Moore’s film “Where to Invade Next” is a tongue-in-cheek look
at nearly twelve other countries and their practices. Many of us would
like to steal these ideas for the US. The almost two-hour film gets a
look at one dimension of life per country which is then compared to the
US experience. Ironically some of their ideas came from the US but are
not executed as well.

Italy was one country viewed and its attention to worker morale and
vacations is remarkable. Italian workers have eight weeks of vacation
time when all time-offs and holidays are counted. They seem to have
equivalent productivity as the U.S. An Italian CEO talks in a way that
would be considered socialist by some in the U.S. The difference in
political culture slaps you in the face!

Finland often scores as having the best education system in the world
and has a national law banning private schools. That is something to
think about given the American experience with private schools and
inequality. Also they have only twenty minutes of homework in high
school. What is not covered is that Nokia’s leaders could not grasp the
importance of the iPhone until it smashed them. Great education does not
always ensure vision by leaders.

One German experience covered is how they relate to their dark history.
Plaques are placed on sidewalks marking where Jews were taken from their
homes to death camps. Local artists are able to place signs noting
events of Nazi history. Moore suggests how Americans might use this
technique to point out slave markets, Indian massacres, and other parts
of our history not always covered in textbooks.

A major critique of the film is that it would work better as a TV
mini-series where you could get a deeper look at the countries’
governance and culture.

“Where to Invade Next” may be coming out in the next month. It should be
on the film list of democratic socialists and maybe encourage us to hear
more of other countries’ achievements so that we can steal them for
ourselves. There is starting to be more discussion in DSA about how
democratic socialism is defined and used in foreign countries. This film
is a small taste but to be truly helpful we will have to delve deeper
into how these countries function.

*A film by Michael Moore — 110 minutes*

[*AFTER PARIS- THE RIGHT ROAD TO COMBATING
TERRORISM*](http://dsadc.org/after-paris-the-right-road-to-combating-terrorism/)

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

Last month’s horrific terrorist attacks in Paris brought forth a swift
barrage of responses, actual and proposed, from politicians in the West.
France immediately took revenge on the Islamic State (known as ISIS), of
which the perpetrators were presumed to be members, by bombing the
Syrian city of Raqqa, the group’s base of operations. Other European
leaders urged the elimination of free movement within the European
Union, which was one of the hallmarks of Europe’s integration. Coming
only months after the Charlie Hebdo massacre, it is understandable that
the French in particular, and Europeans in general, were eager to do
something, anything, in response.

But there seemed to be more rhetoric from American leaders than
European, with U.S. politicos rushing to outdo each other on who could
appear the most fearless in ensuring that a similar attack would not
happen here. Republican candidates for president, not surprisingly,
thumped their chests most vigorously, tying the attack to the ongoing
Syrian refugee crisis, based on suspicions that some of the attackers
might have attached themselves to the stream of migrants[*. Religious
intolerance*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/rabid-dogs-and-muslim-id-cards-anti-islam-rhetoric-grows-in-gop/2015/11/19/1cdf9f04-8ee5-11e5-baf4-bdf37355da0c_story.html?hpid=hp_rhp-top-table-high_islampolitics-848pm%3Ahomepage%2Fstory)
raised its ugly head, as front-runner Donald Trump called for the
shuttering of mosques and, with ominous overtones of Germany in the
1930s, creating a registry of American Muslims; while Jeb Bush and Ted
Cruz, trying to break out of the middle of the pack, called for allowing
only Christian refugees to enter the United States. Ben Carson likened
some Muslims to “rabid dogs.” A stream of governors, almost all of them
Republican, vowed that they would not let refugees into their states,
notwithstanding that governors have no control over people moving into
and out of states once they have entered the country. Lindsay Graham,
the leading hawk among GOP candidates (if not a leader in any other
sense), wants to see U.S. combat boots on the ground in the Middle East,
the sooner the better.

Calmer heads have proposed less offensive solutions, but these voices
have unfortunately been largely drowned out in the ongoing hysteria. All
of the Democratic candidates for president participating in the debate
the day after the attacks emphasized that any U.S. response must be in
collaboration with countries in the Middle East. Bernie Sanders, for
one, in his [*Nov. 19 address at Georgetown
University*](http://www.vox.com/2015/11/19/9762028/bernie-sanders-democratic-socialism),
said that “the fight against ISIS is a struggle for the soul of Islam,
and countering violent extremism and destroying ISIS must be done
primarily by Muslim nations – with the strong support of their global
partners.”

Sanders’ caution is borne of experience. If one examines objectively the
recent history of U.S. involvement in the Middle East, a pattern
emerges: The more the United States intervenes, the worse things get.
The 1990-91 Gulf War, while resulting in driving Iraqi troops from
Kuwait, inflamed and radicalized many people in the region over U.S.
troops remaining in Saudi Arabia, Islam’s “holy land,” after the
fighting was over. This was one of the grievances cited by Osama bin
Laden that motivated his organization al-Qaeda to carry out the Sept.
11, 2001 attacks on the United States. Then came the disastrous 2003
U.S. invasion of Iraq over false accusations that Iraq was behind the
2001 attacks and that it was manufacturing “weapons of mass
destruction.” The war tore Iraq apart and created the political vacuum
that allowed ISIS to take root. And there is the long-standing
resentment by Arab countries over unwavering U.S. support for Israel, no
matter how much that country oppresses Palestinians under its
occupation. For the United States, the goals of Mideast policy have been
to protect Israel and keep the region’s supply of oil flowing, not
necessarily in that order. If that means stepping on the necks of most
of the people of region, so be it.

The overreach of the West in the Middle East is a long-simmering source
of resentment in Muslim lands and fuel for the growth of extremism in
the region, a phenomenon that formed a backdrop of the *Cairo Trilogy*
of Nobel Prize-winning Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz. This saga of a
fictional Egyptian family, spanning the period between the two world
wars, depicted the tensions in Egyptian society as Western values and
mores encroached on the Muslim practices that had persisted for
centuries. Some embraced the liberating effects of the new ways, while
others, fearing a loss of control over their own society, joined Islamic
organizations such as the Muslim Brotherhood. “Should we give up our
religion in order to please foreigners?” asks a character who has
embraced strict Islam as a response to creeping Western influences.
Politicians who opine on how their Middle East policies would end our
headaches in the region would do well to read Mahfouz before forming
their half-baked opinions.

This loss of control, this encroachment of Western ways that threaten to
erase tradition, has contributed to the backlash and rise of Islamic
radicalism as a defense mechanism. The United States is correctly
perceived as the main engine of Westernization in the Middle East.
Rhetoric such as that coming from Trump, Bush and Cruz only confirms
Muslim fears that the United States intends to Christianize the Islamic
lands, as does the [*proposal of Ohio Gov. John
Kasich*](http://www.politico.com/story/2015/11/john-kasich-judeo-christian-agency-216056)
– another GOP presidential hopeful – for a new federal agency to spread
“Judeo-Christian values.” ISIS has gotten the message, and its [*claim
of
responsibility*](http://www.vox.com/2015/11/14/9734794/isis-claim-paris-statement)
for the Paris attacks cited France as a “crusader nation” for its past
air strikes against ISIS forces. But a more realistic fear is that the
United States and its Western allies intend to incorporate the Mideast
more firmly into the global capitalist web, converting a region more
accustomed to small, family-owned business into yet another source of
low-wage labor and cheap natural resources.

To be sure, there are many features of Western society that most of us
would like to see spread more widely in the Middle East and other Muslim
lands, including freedom of religious practice, greater democracy and –
perhaps most of all – gender equality in a region where, in many places,
women are virtually slaves of their husbands or fathers. Many Middle
Easterners, however, see these values as inseparable from rapacious
capitalism, Christianity, and looting of their wealth. When viewed this
way, one can see the attraction of preserving the old ways by any means
necessary.

Those who see this as a battle between peaceful, tolerant Christianity
and violent, intolerant Islam have a short view of history. We are only
a few centuries removed from the Crusades, the Inquisition, the
religious bloodletting of the Thirty Years War and the expulsion of Jews
from England and Spain; and less than a century removed from pogroms and
the Holocaust – the latter of which was made possible by centuries of
Christian intolerance. The ideals of freedom of thought and freedom of
worship in Europe came about only after centuries of struggle and
sectarian violence. The predominantly Christian countries were the
colonizers, their armies accompanied by missionaries who converted
natives at gunpoint. Western colonization included domination over
Muslim lands, which precipitated an earlier wave of Muslim immigration
to Europe – France being one of the principal destinations. The
marginalization and poverty experienced these European Muslim
communities have experienced have made them a breeding ground for
extremist organizations.

Why does it seem (“seem” is the operative word) that there are no
Christian terrorists? The answer: Christianity has been joined at the
hip to the world’s most powerful armies. It is the beleaguered Muslims
that feel the need to fight back. I am reminded of a story (possibly
apocryphal) of Mohandas Gandhi being asked what he thought about Western
civilization, to which he was said to respond, “I think it would be a
good idea.”

The answer is, then, not the big boot of U.S. intervention in the
region, but the exercise of soft power. Support the moderate Muslim
nations that show Islam need not mean repression and dictatorship; there
are too few of them but Turkey is the best example (although it is
battling its own domestic Islamists). Offer friendship and assistance,
not guns and bombs. And part of this assistance is not shunning the
region’s refugees, but rather doing our share to offer refuge. Lead by
example, not by invasion. It is the longer, harder road, but the only
path to the destination of true peace.

[*Convention Impressions*](http://dsadc.org/convention-impressions/)

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2015 **

*By Andy Feeney*

The best moment at this year’s DSA national convention, for me, came on
the last day. The auditorium where the plenary was meeting was chilly,
and I ducked out for a few minutes to get an extra sweater. When I
returned to the table seating most of the Metro DC delegation, four of
our younger members were engaged in vigorous exchanges with Jose and
Ingrid about local organizing possibilities for the ‘We Need Bernie’
campaign. I had nothing at all to contribute, partly because I was late
but mostly because the younger members, Jose and Ingrid were doing all
the political work. It was a great moment.

Looking around the auditorium, I also noticed younger members from many
other chapters in lively discussions about DSA’s future. Baby Boomers my
age and older still made up a majority in the room, but not an
overwhelming one. And I reflected that whatever achievements and
failures DSA has seen since I got involved six years ago, we’ve begun to
recruit a new generation of democratic socialists to succeed those who
either knew Michael Harrington personally, or could have. The thought
gives me hope for socialism’s future is this traditionally
anti-socialist culture. Kudos to Jessie, Merrill, Sammy and Ken from
Metro DC (and to Jonathan from our new Baltimore chapter} for the energy
and intelligence with which they’re picking up the torch for change.

Another fine moment came during Saturday night’s customary fundraising
event, which in past conventions has impressed me as a fairly grim
affair in which DSA leadership tries to guilt-trip the delegates into
giving more to DSA than we really want to. This year the sum donated
exceeded the leadership’s target, which was very impressive. Some
delegates made extremely generous pledges totaling in the hundreds of
dollars; and a few made generous sustainer pledges totaling even more.
But what I liked best was that Joe Schwartz, DSA’s long-time political
guru, dropped his customary university professor’s stance and did
leftwing stand-up comedy at the fundraiser to make the giving more
bearable. Joe can be an implacable opponent in internal DSA political
debates, but on this night he was both relaxed and funny, and I think
even some of his customary political adversaries enjoyed it. Solidarity
Forever! And may one-liners make us strong!

I also enjoyed the workshop on Socialist Feminism: Theory and Practice
that Carolyn Byerly from our steering committee led with Peg Strobel
from Chicago; it gave me a sense of what I think socialist feminists and
others mean when they speak of creating a “safe space” for people who
may be nervous about fitting into somebody else’s agenda. I felt
surprisingly safe listening to Carolyn and Peg discuss feminism, and I
hope I’ve learned something about group process, as well as the history
of the feminist movement. Also useful was a workshop on techniques for
strengthening local chapters led by David Green of Detroit and Hope
Adair from Atlanta.

Finally, I found it politically and personally rewarding – as well as
cheap – to share a 5-man bedroom with four of my DC and Baltimore
comrades. We talked late into the night and I really enjoyed the
experience, despite one comrade’s amazing Richter-scale snore. Even with
the snore, I would happily do it again.

[*CONVENTION WORKSHOP ON FEMINISM YIELDS PROSPECTS FOR IMPROVEMENT,
ISSUES OF
PRACTICE*](http://dsadc.org/convention-workshop-on-feminism-yields-prospects-for-improvement-issues-of-practice/)

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2015**

*By Woody Woodruff*

A “theory and practice” workshop on feminism in our work and in our
locals at DSA’s 2015 convention illuminated bright spots and persisting
gendered practices in both spheres.

Led by Carolyn Byerly of the Metro DC local and Peg Strobel of the
Chicago/Oak Park local, the session began with the historical
development of feminist theory and practice on the left.

Strobel, an historian, outlined the varied narrative history of the
“woman question” on the left, with Engels giving it more attention than
Marx and examining matrilineal societies such as the Iroquois
Confederation. Early socialist focus on those who sold their labor to
capitalists – nearly all male – couldn’t encompass the unpaid labor of
women at home. Later (turn of the 19^th^-20^th^ centuries) socialists
diverted into the function and role of marriage, which Emma Goldman
accurately identified as “an economic arrangement, an insurance pact”
that routinely subordinated women. Ancillary debates about sexuality
beyond the binary fused with theory that projected mature (future)
socialism as a context for deregulated love, both in parallel
development, as epitomized in the work of the Russian feminist Alexandra
Kollontai.

Byerly, a feminist communication scholar, recounted the growth of
feminism in and out of the stream of left political development. Women,
she noted, were involved in early trade union support and left parties,
including the Socialist Party, and were supporters in the suffrage
struggle (but there were internal fights about how suffrage and class
politics intersected, or didn’t). In the world war and interwar periods
feminism appeared more often as lifestyle debates in the industrial West
but sexual equality was advanced as law in some Communist societies. In
the theory resurgence of the 1960s the class question resumed, with race
added – white bourgeois women seemed privileged to do all the speaking
for women, leaning the discussion toward liberal feminism and away from
the radical variety. Left organizations like DSA have helped integrate
class and race questions back into the discussion but feminism is an
unfinished and dynamic theory.

In a group activity, participants developed a view of how successfully
feminist perspectives and practices were playing out in their locals.
Problems of what some were experiencing in their locals included:

-   Gendered assumptions about the division of labor — some still saw
    women doing chapter maintenance and even post-meeting cleanup with
    tacit male acceptance;

-   Specific constraints (especially family) that limited women’s time
    for activism; locals are not always sure or able to accommodate
    women;

-   Internal discussions are still often dominated by men and women have
    to struggle for an equitable role in leadership and direction
    despite bylaw guidelines.

But some progress was seen by some in:

-   A strong role for women in the fast-growing Austin local, many
    recruited from union activists;

-   Female leadership in other locals such as DC and Detroit;

-   Conscious, local-wide participation in important women’s issue areas
    such as reproductive rights, violence against women and affordable
    housing;

-   Success in recruiting women through nontraditional (for DSA)
    outreach – the Sanders campaign, book discussion groups.

 

*Thanks to Carolyn Byerly for her excellent notes on the session.*

[*GOOD READS FOR
SOCIALISTS*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-5/) December
2015

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2015**

As a frontline part of the Solidarity Economy, food co-ops are going
into food deserts that the chain groceries are avoiding to preserve
their Wall Street standing. This account from the Cooperative
Development Institute shows how food co-ops are part of a concerted
effort to “regain local and democratic control over key community
resources” and is distinguished by the rich array of links to further
information and detailed examples.
[*http://www.cdi.coop/food-coops-food-deserts-low-income-communities/*](http://www.cdi.coop/food-coops-food-deserts-low-income-communities/)

Another conceptual part of the solidarity economy is the assertion of
decent shelter as a human and social right, buttressed by a rebuilding
of the nation’s public housing stock on many pathways. In a dispatch
shared by *Dissent* and *Jacobin*, Karen Narefsky contextualizes the
history of public housing (including its post-Nixon decline into support
for public housing as a Section 8 profit center for capital) and
proposes models for a revitalization of the “public” in housing. She
notes that when public housing is scaled up sufficiently, “The
prevalence of public housing imposes de facto rent controls on private
landlords, who cannot raise rents far beyond what the government charges
if they want to attract tenants.” This piece complements Andy Feeney’s
account in this issue of our November Salon discussion on gentrification
in our region.
8https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/11/public-housing-social-welfare-crisis-affordable-gentrification/

**Responses to the DSA convention in addition to what you see among our
contributions in this issue…**

Here’s Atlanta’s Barbara Joye, from the *Democratic Left* blog:
[*http://www.dsausa.org/dsa\_convention\_new\_strategy\_for\_a\_new\_era\_dl?recruiter\_id=2*](http://www.dsausa.org/dsa_convention_new_strategy_for_a_new_era_dl?recruiter_id=2)

**The Bernie File… several quick responses to Sen. Sanders’s talk at
Georgetown **

Here is Harold Meyerson’s observation in the *American Prospect*… like
all good things, it was crossposted in *Portside*…
[*http://prospect.org/article/bernie-defines-socialism*](http://prospect.org/article/bernie-defines-socialism)

Here is Bhaskar Sunkara’s interview with Dylan Mathews in *Vox* on the
Sanders speech.
[*http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2015/11/20/9767096/bernie-sanders-socialism-jacobin*](http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2015/11/20/9767096/bernie-sanders-socialism-jacobin)

Here is a roll-up package from *Portside*, again, with a statement from
Seattle’s socialist city council member Kshama Sawant plus three short
takes from *Jacobin* contributors and editors:
http://portside.org/2015-11-21/four-takes-bernie-sanders-democratic-socialism-speech

Where does the responsibility for corporate misdeeds start and stop? A
searching piece in *The Guardian* uses the trial, now concluding, of
Massey Energy boss Don Blankenship for his role in the Big Branch mine
disaster that killed 29 miners to explore how hard it can be to bring
individuals to book for these tragedies and massive frauds.
[*http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-money-blog/2015/nov/22/west-virginia-mine-explosion-trial-massey-energy-jailing-ceo*](http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-money-blog/2015/nov/22/west-virginia-mine-explosion-trial-massey-energy-jailing-ceo)

One of the most puzzling phenomena in the US is the tendency of red
states – net importers of federal tax revenue, users of public provision
– to vote against Democrats and their favoring of public provision. This
fine piece of reporting helps us understand that, and points out some
mobilization needs that aren’t being met.
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/22/opinion/sunday/who-turned-my-blue-state-red.html?ref=opinion&\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/22/opinion/sunday/who-turned-my-blue-state-red.html?ref=opinion&_r=0)

Juan Cole, in *The Nation* (also reposted in *Portside*) argues
forcefully that the “Islamic State” is a criminal enterprise, not in any
sense a “state,” and Francois Hollande made a rhetorical blunder in
declaring France’s “war” against a non-state. “The Paris terrorists bear
much more resemblance to biker-gang members and unbalanced mass shooters
than they do to the special-forces operatives of a proper state.”
[*http://www.thenation.com/article/isis\_wants\_a\_clash/*](http://www.thenation.com/article/isis_wants_a_clash/)

Sam Pizzigati’s blog, “Too Much,” anatomizes the world of inequality in
all its ways every month. The December issue has a particularly
fascinating interview with Martine Durand, the chief
economist/statistician for the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development. The OECD, you’ll remember, was a pioneer in developing
quality-of-life measures for societies/nation-states that pinpoint what
GDP and other measures miss. Read it at
[*http://toomuchonline.org/tmmonthly.html*](http://toomuchonline.org/tmmonthly.html)

Andy Feeney recommends this post from the Committees of Correspondence
for Democracy and Socialism. Harry Targ’s “Politics of Chaos” is the
kickoff for pre-convention discussion in our kindred left organization.
[*http://www.ccds-discussion.org/?p=5150*](http://www.ccds-discussion.org/?p=5150)

[*Government-linked Co-ops- a Once and Future
Model*](http://dsadc.org/government-linked-co-ops-a-once-and-future-model/)

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2015**

*By Daniel Adkins*

DSA’s vision of the future includes worker-run coops, but there are
other non-profits we need to know about that are economically important.
These are not all worker-run but some are unionized and have been around
a while.

Utility cooperatives are tasked with delivering electricity, water, or
telecommunications to their members. Many of these cooperatives were
created during the New Deal and are in Republican-dominated states.
Profits are either reinvested or distributed to members based on the
member’s investment in the coop. Each member has an equal say as every
other member. Most of these cooperatives are in rural America. Many
cooperatives strive to provide the best service at the lowest cost, but
rural infrastructure is more costly then the more compact urban areas.
These cooperatives receive a preference from federal Power
Administrations.

In additions to the Tennessee Valley Administration, there are four
Department of Energy Power Administrations. These power administrations
cover most of the U.S. except for the Northeast. Most of these were
created in the 1930s and provide low-cost electricity for public
agencies, including states, cities, towns, electric cooperatives, and
Native American tribes. These administrations originally were based on
hydroelectric power but now include nuclear and coal plants. Power left
over after supplying public needs are sold on the open market. These
administrations aid load balancing from intermittent renewable
generation. They also play a role in flood control and regional
environmental management.

One reason for these organizations was to eliminate rural poverty and
develop the countryside. The coops and the power administrations brought
electric lighting to much of America. Given the sad state of Appalachia,
there is the need for an Appalachian power administration today that
could be based on renewables.

The power administrations played a significant part in the World War II
victory by providing the electricity for the production of aluminum for
aircraft. They also served the Manhattan Project.

Under President Clinton federal unions partnered with their agencies. If
a democratic socialist does become president in the near future, the
possibilities of agency/union partnering need to be considered and used.
Worker coops are great, but creating a more cooperative hierarchical
structure need to be on our to-do list too. There are tools for getting
more cooperation in hierarchical organizations.   A 360-degree
evaluation of staff and managers can provide critiques to remedy a
kiss-up, kick-down authoritarian culture. The quality movement provides
ways to improve processes and get staff involved in how organizations
work. These and many other policies can humanize hierarchical
organizations and make them more productive.

[*Health, Medicine and Social Change: A Review of the film Revolutionary
Medicine: the Story of the first Garifuna
Hospital*](http://dsadc.org/health-medicine-and-social-change-a-review-of-the-film-revolutionary-medicine-the-story-of-the-first-garifuna-hospital/)

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December
2015                                                                                  
**

*By Kurt Stand*

Health care must speak to each individual’s physiological needs – but so
too it must address individuals’ psychological needs, and must recognize
the social, economic and cultural conditions within which people live
and work. Those connections are made explicit in ***Revolutionary
Medicine: the story of the first Garifuna Hospital,*** a 45-minute film
that documents the creation of a free community-run hospital in Garifuna
– one of the poorest communities in Honduras (itself, one of the poorest
countries in Latin America) – a community without roads, electricity, or
social services of any kind. Descended from survivors of a shipwrecked
British slave vessel in the early 17^th^ century, the Garifuna people
have long battled racism, poverty and underdevelopment. Prior to the
building of the hospital, the nearest doctor or medical facility was
more than 12 hours distant, a reality that meant that illness was often
simply a death sentence – a truth reflected in the grim detail of an
average life span of 52. About 75 people attended the showing at the
AFL-CIO headquarters in an event sponsored by the Federation, the Metro
DC Labor Council and the National Nurses Union. The NNU has developed a
solidarity relationship with medical practitioners in Honduras and sees
in its work the kind of bottom-up health care that will be possible in
the US only if and when we adopt a single-payer health system – a point
made both by NNU Political Director Ken Zinn and by medical
anthropologist and American University Associate Professor Adrienne
Pine, who introduced the film. What that means in practice was described
in greater detail after the screening by Dr. Luther Castillo – a
Garifuna doctor who founded the hospital.

Produced and directed by independent documentarian Beth Gaglia, based in
Washington DC, and Canadian film maker Jesse Freeston, based in
Montreal, the movie tells the story of the building of a hospital – run
on solar power from necessity owing to the absence of electrical power –
in Ciriboya, Colon on Honduras’ Caribbean Coast. The hospital does not
stand alone — it is part of a holistic health system built by members of
the community it serves; thus all services, consultations, and
medications are provided free of charge, a necessity if people who live
in grinding poverty are otherwise to be served.   The community has not
only built the hospital, but defended it as well against threats by the
right-wing government that has dominated the country since the 2009
US-backed coup that ousted Honduran’ democratically–elected president
Manuel Zelaya after he began to implement a modest program of social
reform. Free health care for the poorest is a threat to a medical system
that has taken privatization to the extreme as patients must now pay for
everything – from doctors’ surgical gloves to the needles used when
getting a vaccination. And the grass-roots community organization
inherent in the building and running of the hospital is itself a form of
organization that stands in the way of threated displacement by a
right-wing government that seeks to remove the Garifuna from their land
and turn the area into a tourist playground for the well-heeled from
abroad.

Watching the film, listening to interviews with Castillo and the other
men and women working at the hospital, one question kept recurring –
just how did people from such isolated areas even get the chance to
become doctors? The answer is given by Castillo in the documentary (and
explained by him in greater depth during his talk at the AFL-CIO after
the showing): Cuba’s medical school – which provides training for poor
students from the poorest countries in the world (and from impoverished
areas in the US) – asking only that those so trained go back to serve
the communities from whence they came. Castillo was such a student as
are virtually all of Garifuna’s doctors and nurses. It is in Cuba too
that a sense of the interconnection between personal health and social
health is made. Castillo explained the matter by talking about how
almost all the women they treat complain of back pain. The individual
diagnosis might be medication followed by rest – but poor women who work
and raise children can’t rest. And simply prescribing more medicine has
only limited value, all the more so as an inadequate diet means that
medication can easily lead to gastritis or other stomach problems.
Instead there is a need to go to the source of the problem, the 40-60
pounds of firewood women carry every day for that is the only source of
power they have for their homes. Thus, alongside medication, alongside,
rest, alongside better food, what is needed is development that will
serve, not exploit or displace, the community. Again and again, the film
shows such connections being made.

The film includes a mass march led by 214 drums – a march that was also
a dance – following a 27-hour journey by foot and bus to the national
capital, Tegucigalpa, to protest social exclusion. The marchers then
returned home (the same 27-hour trip in reverse), energized by the
experience, energized by acting and not simply being victimized. Such
demonstrations, just as the work of the hospital, do not happen easily
or spontaneously, but it can happen when people see the connection of
social change on the quality of their lives and future – social action,
that is, returning back to individual needs and hopes. The connecting
link is solidarity, for as Castillo said during that protest, “We
believe in the accelerating march toward a new country, with a new
constitution that reflects the rainbow of different faces in this
country, the indigenous, the blacks, the workers, the farmers, the
unionists, the professionals, that they are all recognized.”

For more information about the film or information as to how to order it
go to: http://revolutionarymedicine.org/

[*Living Our Strategy, Not Just Speaking It: Thoughts on the DSA 2015
Convention*](http://dsadc.org/living-our-strategy-not-just-speaking-it-thoughts-on-the-dsa-2015-convention/)

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; December 2015**

*By M. Miller*

Oftentimes, our enthusiasm as activists leads us to tackling large
issues without any firm connection to our larger goals. This rashness is
often rooted in noble aims—we are empathetic to the suffering of people
around us, we are indignant at the injustices of inequality, and we
genuinely desire to implement progressive social change. We see a
problem, so we rush in to try to solve it. Unfortunately, without larger
goals in mind, this type of activism often fails to generate systematic
change in the long-term. It may solve individual issues here and there
and it may do a lot of good for many people, but the structural
inequalities all too often remain. What we need, as activists, is a
long-term strategy.

For this reason, I was particularly pleased that Democratic Socialists
of America (DSA) passed an overarching strategy document at its 2015
convention. The document affirms the good work that DSA chapters are
doing all over the country to rectify inequality and present positive,
socialist alternatives to our current capitalist system. But it also
defines the long-term goals of the organization as a whole in such a way
that it allows activists to focus their work on issues that will have
the most effective and long-lasting gains both for the organization
itself and for the democratic socialist aim of creating a more equitable
society. The strategy document emphasizes long-term goals for the
organization, such as reaching out to people of color, women and other
marginalized communities, that will grow democratic socialism as a
national movement while also allowing chapters to focus on local
problems in their own communities. The document also contained a sense
of urgency, particularly surrounding the dire need for climate justice
in a globe that has been ravaged by capitalism, which will hopefully
spur chapters to increase their local activism and raise the profile of
democratic socialism. If our movement is to have any traction, we cannot
simply react to problems as they arise, but we must also proactively
seek out opportunities to build coalitions with other groups and advance
our vision of a democratically controlled economic sector. The strategy
document acts as a roadmap for DSA nationally, locally and even
individually to take these proactive steps.

What struck me most at the convention, other than the breadth of the
strategy document itself, was the way in which it was adopted. Unlike
many other organizations with which I have been involved, DSA
implemented its strategy in a democratic manner that aligned with the
organization’s principles. Instead of the document being formulated by a
national staff and board and then foisted upon the individual members,
the document was a product of collaboration and planning at both the
national and local levels. Individual members were given ample
opportunity to weigh in on the strategy document and suggest amendments
to it. Considerable time at the convention was dedicated to discussing
the document so that every delegate present thoroughly understood the
strategy and could vote for its passage with confidence. Instead of
claiming to be for the grassroots while functioning under a top-down
administration, the DSA convention operated as a microcosm of the
informed, fair and democratic society that it hopes to bring about.

This attitude was present in the passage of the strategy document, but
it also permeated the entire proceedings of the convention. At other
conferences and national gatherings that I have attended, hosted by
other organizations, I have often found the national staff, board and
other organizational leaders to be distant from the ordinary members of
the movement. Other conventions that I have attended have brought in
lauded speakers and activists who all too often end up behaving like
drama queens and divas, demanding special attention and deference, even
as they give lofty speeches about democratic principles. I experienced
none of this snobbery or superiority at the DSA convention. The national
staff was helpful and always attentive, despite the tireless work that
they were all doing to ensure that the plenaries and workshops ran
smoothly. All of the DSA leaders whom I met were friendly and open, and
they treated me as though I was just as important to the organization as
they were. Rather than promoting themselves or stroking their own egos,
people seemed genuinely excited to connect with other democratic
socialists, trade tips on building local chapters, and share stories
about how they had become involved in Left politics. The atmosphere of
the convention was welcoming, and watching the commitment of everyone to
living out their democratic values of fairness and equality in both
their individual interactions with people and their larger activism was
truly empowering.

Given this environment of solidarity, I am confident that the DSA
strategy document will not just be words on paper but an implemented
guide that is acted upon by local chapters and activists. A strategy is
only useful if it leads to action, and DSA’s strategy document will only
be as useful as the organization’s individual members make it. We cannot
merely speak about our strategy. We must also live it. Fortunately, I
expect that DSA’s members are more than up to that challenge.

[*The US Military’s Crippling Obsession with High-Tech
Death*](http://dsadc.org/the-us-militarys-crippling-obsession-with-high-tech-death/)

Tuesday, December 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* December 2015**

** ***Kill Chain: The Rise of the High-Tech Assassins*

A book by Andrew Cockburn (Verso, 2015)

Review by *David H. Richardson*

In 1999, then-presidential candidate George Bush said in a speech at The
Citadel “When direct threats to America are discovered, I know that the
best defense can be a strong and swift offense—including the use of
Special Operations Forces … we must be prepared to strike across the
world with pinpoint accuracy—with long-range aircraft and perhaps with
unmanned systems.” (p. 250) Thirteen years later, President Obama, in
his defense vision, declared that “as we reduce the overall defense
budget, we will protect, and in some cases increase, our investments in
special operations forces, in new technologies like ISR and unmanned
systems …” (p. 250) Since 2001, the American taxpayer has shelled out
trillions, not billions, in military adventures, only to see the
terrorists expand from a few bases maintained in Afghanistan at the
sufferance of the Taliban, to a territory the size of Utah with outposts
in a half-dozen other countries. While suffering setbacks, their
trajectory was and continues to be on the rise, while American influence
in the Middle East has been and is on the decline.

*Kill Chain: The Rise of the High-Tech Assassins* by Andrew Cockburn, an
editor of *Harper’s* magazine and a younger brother of the late
Alexander Cockburn, is the story of this failure.<span id="_ftnref1"
class="anchor"></span>*\[1\]* Given the dollar amounts expended, let
alone the loss of life, the result can only be characterized as
catastrophic. While a catastrophe of this magnitude can only be
described as a team effort on the part of the US military, the US Air
Force, with its drone operations, its core belief in strategic bombing,
and its faith in computer automated systems, is at the top of the list.
The US Army brass, in its determination to wage war against civilian
populations, especially in Iraq and Afghanistan, also comes in for its
share of criticism. By comparison the enlisted men and low-ranking
officers who had to actually bear the brunt of the fighting come off
relatively lightly, and are often seen as micro-managed by the generals.

The kill chain itself is the chain of command that authorizes lethal
drone strikes and special operations. As this review is being written,
the news is awash with reports of the death by drone strike of Mohammed
Emwazi or “Jihadi John,” the British Muslim who executed hostages on
video, and Wisam al Zubaidi, the head of the ISIS affiliate in Libya.
Before we place too much credence in these reports, we should look at
the results of some past drone strikes. On a cold night in February
2010, two small SUVs and a four-door pickup carrying 35 men, women, and
children, four under age six, were traveling toward Kandahar on the way
to Kabul. It was a slow trip with stops for engine trouble and a flat
tire. On the seemingly deserted highway, unknown to the group, a Special
Ops raiding party had landed nearby and a reconnaissance drone circled
overhead. Backing up the drone was a ground crew including the pilot,
intelligence analysts, and communications officers in Nevada and
Florida. Instead of people, what they saw on their screens was blobs on
the ground. When first picked up, the vehicles were headed toward the
raiding party, but never came closer than 10 miles, and after an hour
they turned away. Nonetheless, a helicopter gunship attack was called in
which killed 23 people, including two boys three and four, and wounded
eight men, one woman, and three children between five and 14. On the
basis of pictures from the drone they had all been positively identified
as military-age males.

* *In fact, the Air Force knew that this sort of thing was likely to
happen when they put the drones into service. A military reform movement
in the 1980s attempted to stem the tide of ever more expensive weapons
of dubious utility, and in 1983 it succeeded in creating the Office of
Operational Test and Evaluation, one of the least-popular agencies ever
conceived. In 2001 new Director Thomas P. Christie took as his first
project to test the Predator drone. He found that the Predator couldn’t
take off or land except in near-perfect weather: snow, rain, ice, frost,
or fog, it didn’t matter. Drones operate at 12,000 to 15,000 feet to
avoid hand-held surface-to-air missiles. The team used a rating scale
for visual accuracy to analyze data from 15,000 feet, from 1 for a large
airplane to 9, the ability to recognize a human face. While “\[t\]he
drones were supposed to score 6, ‘recognize supply dumps, identify
vehicles’ at a range of 6 miles, the day TV scored no better than 2.7.
Overall, Predator could find less than a third of its targets.” (p. 68)
The images were never good enough to distinguish between a truck and a
tank. People turn into blobs on the screen, with the result that the
viewers engage in a kind of Rorschach test, and see whatever they want
to see. The final report, sent to the secretary of defense, the heads of
all the relevant congressional committees, and the top brass, said that
“The Predator UAV is not operationally effective. This conclusion is
based on poor performance in target location accuracy, ineffective
communications, and limits imposed by relatively benign weather.” (p.
71) The report was ignored.

* *The book itself is a page turner: it reads like action fiction, sci
fi, a detective novel, pick your favorite escape vehicle, and it draws
you in in a similar way. It’s a series of stories around a theme, the
endless fascination with technology as a means of war fighting, and the
fiascoes that have resulted therefrom.<span id="_ftnref2"
class="anchor"></span>*\[2\]* We all know how the seemingly random
killings have turned the people of the Middle East against us, and
there’s enough of that in the book. For me, however, the main story
concerns the increasing impotence of the US military despite, or perhaps
because of, its dramatic investment in technology. One early
implementation of this profoundly mistaken direction was the \$6 billion
electric fence intended to keep “the” Ho Chi Minh Trail from delivering
supplies to the Viet Cong in South Vietnam. It took the North only a
week to circumvent it, in part because there was no actual trail but
rather a network that could be utilized to confuse and frustrate the
electronics.

* *Another early implementation was the Air Force strategy in World War
II that the war could be won by strategic bombing alone. The idea was
that a modern economy relies on inter-connectivity, and that the
destruction of key links could bring a whole country to a halt. However,
it turned out that ball bearings weren’t the key to the functioning of
the Reich, nor were hydroelectric dams, not were a whole list of other
possible key links. The 1943 British firebombing of Hamburg, for
example, had the effect of actually increasing production in that city.
Before the bombing there had been a labor shortage in Hamburg. However,
the bombs demolished the downtown, and people who had worked in the
service sector, hotels, restaurants and the like, saw their places of
employment destroyed, and went to work in the war plants on the
outskirts. The result of the strategic bombing campaign was that we came
close to implementing Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau’s vision of
turning Germany into a cow pasture, yet the German war machine chugged
on until it was defeated on the ground.

* *ater, facing more recent enemies without a military industrial
complex, the key links came to be seen as people rather than things,
which didn’t work any better. This strategy was tried out in the war on
drugs, with the initial target being Pablo Escobar and the Medellin
cocaine cartel. While numerous surveillance aircraft were employed in
the hunt for Escobar, they were of no help and he was eventually located
with the help of the rival Cali cartel. Alas, their assistance did them
no good, and we destroyed the Cali cartel as well. If these moves had
been successful in stemming the tide of cocaine, we should have seen
prices rise in the United States. In fact, “cocaine prices … immediately
went into a precipitous decline.” (p. 101) The reason was that the
cartels had created a duopoly, and once they were broken up they were
replaced by a couple of dozen smaller but even more lethal operations
which ***competed*** with each other, thereby driving the prices down.
This led former Air Force pilot Rex Rivolo, then with Operations
Evaluation, to suggest that “\[t\]he best thing would have been to keep
one cartel over which we had some control.” (p. 102) More generally,
shadowy organizations involved in crime or terrorism are decentralized,
and don’t depend on their top leaders for their success. Rather, under
the top leaders are younger, more violent guys ready to step up when the
top guy goes down, and hence assassinating the leaders is a fool’s
errand.

* *The first few months of the war in Afghanistan were a near-total
success. After the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif, the leaders of the Taliban
fled south to Pakistan and the lower level fighters were told to go
home, with the result that the US military very quickly established
control of the whole country. However, the Americans and the British
insisted on targeting the now departed leaders, with the result that
local warlords and even ordinary Afghans turned over their enemies as
terrorists, thereby ingratiating themselves with the new rulers and
turning a nice profit as well. After several iterations, the end result
was the establishment of the “signature strike,” in which “it would no
longer be necessary to identify the target. Merely looking like a
terrorist would be sufficient to trigger a strike.” (p. 224) Group
gatherings were especially suspect, so wedding parties, Afghan local
councils called jirgas, and funeral processions did not occur as people
attempted not to act like terrorists were thought to act.

Incompetent as they may be against America’s enemies, there is one
battle the armed forces are good at: the budget wars in Washington. The
branch that is actually able to fight a war all by itself is the Navy,
together with its Naval Air Systems Command and Marine Corps. By
comparison, the Air Force and the Army are hobbled by their mutual
dependence and hence start at a disadvantage in the battle for the
budget. To compensate, the Air Force developed the doctrine that
strategic bombing could win a war all by itself, with a dramatic
reduction in American casualties to boot. It didn’t work in WWII, it
isn’t working against ISIS, and there is no evidence that it has worked
anytime in between. It has, however, created the potential to incinerate
the planet in a hypothetical nuclear exchange.

* *In a sense the drone is the ultimate high-tech weapon, (initially)
inexpensive, lethal, putting no Americans in harms way, and (at least
where there are no real air defense systems) virtually invulnerable.
With its monitors widely available in generals’ offices, it gives the
illusion that they can conduct the battle themselves, never mind that
they are over-riding and micromanaging the officers who have
responsibility on the ground. Weaponized and with a license to kill,
what could go wrong?

* *For all its faults, the Predator was relatively cheap at \$5 million
per copy. The 2005 Reaper drone, at \$30 million plus \$5 million per
year maintenance, much more than older manned aircraft, was billed as an
improvement. However, “it carries essentially the same sensors as the
Predator,” (p. 178) i.e., people still appear as blobs with no ability
to recognize gender, let alone whether they are armed or not. However,
the prices were getting up to levels that could interest the major
defense contractors, and Northrup Grumman came out with the Global Hawk,
whose initial price tag ballooned from \$10 million to \$223 million
each. Unwanted by either the Air Force or the Obama Administration, the
high price turned out actually to be an advantage in the budget debates,
since the work could be spread over more congressional districts. It
replaced the U-2, which, as it turns out, took better photographs. (p.
181) One thing all these high-tech strategies share is the hubris of
their proponents and their unwillingness to face facts as one after
another of their failures are swept under the rug.

* *The whole high-tech system was tested at a war game called Millennial
Challenge 2002.<span id="_ftnref3" class="anchor"></span>*\[3\]* Marine
Lt. Gen. Paul Van Riper commanded the Red (enemy) team as a rogue
military commander in the Persian Gulf for some reason willing to take
on the US Military. Full of scorn for the theories underlying the
standard doctrine, Van Riper surmised that the implied rules were
secondary, and he played to win. While the Challenge involved thousands
of troops, ground vehicles, and aircraft scattered across the United
States, much of the action was virtual, played as a computer game. In
the first few hours, the Blue (US) team knocked out Van Riper’s fiber
optics, expecting him to be forced to use easily intercepted radio
communications. Instead, he used motorcycle couriers and coded messages
embedded in in the Muslim calls to prayer. As planned, a US carrier task
force steamed up the Gulf. The Blue commander said “I have a feeling
that Red is going to strike.” (p. 135) However, “his staff was quick to
assure him that their ONA \[Operational Net Assessment\] made it clear
that this could not happen.” (p. 135)

* *While previous Red commanders had used their missiles in dribs and
drabs, Van Riper used them all at once in a salvo, sinking 16 virtual
ships and taking 20,000 virtual servicemen and women to the bottom.
“Only a few days in, the war was over, and the twenty-first century U.S.
military had been beaten hands down.” (p. 136) The brass responded to
this reverse as the good bureaucrats they were, and Van Riper was told
that the ships had been refloated by magic and the game would continue.
To his credit, he quit in disgust. “Afterward he wrote a scathing
report, documenting how the exercise had been rigged and by whom, but no
outsider could read it because it was promptly classified.” (p. 136)

* *Before I read *Kill Chain*, I knew that the military was the main
source of fraud, waste, and abuse in the government, if only because it
has the only budget that doesn’t receive effective oversight, and also
because I observed fairly low level GS-9’s receiving expensive trips.
The Millennial Challenge, among all the other things that went wrong
about the new generation of high-tech weapons, left me with a much more
grim assessment: the military as it has come to be structured may well
not be capable of fulfilling its basic duty of providing for the common
defense.

*\[1\]*     Of course assassination is not permitted under Executive
Order 11905, issued by Gerald Ford and reaffirmed by Carter and Reagan.
However, “Administration officials later explained to the *Washington
Post* some of the ways in which the ban might not really ban
assassinations, suggesting ‘… the order could be revoked or simply
ignored, arguing that covert action against terrorists could be defended
as something other than ‘political assassination.”” (p. 90)

*\[2\]*     See, e.g., Robin Williams in *Toys.*

*\[3\]*     War games are essential to the development of military
strategy. For example, war games in the 1930s showed that, after a
Japanese attack, immediate retaliation against Japan itself would fail,
while the island hopping strategy actually adopted would win.
