***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from April 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the April edition of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-april-edition-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Thursday, April 2nd, 2015

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the April edition of the *Washington Socialist*, the
monthly email newsletter of the Metro DC local of Democratic Socialists
of America.**

Conventionally, this is April Fools Day, historically “all fools’ day,”
which has a rich history as one of the weapons of the powerless. In late
medieval and early modern times surprising currents of rebellion were
sustained by the yearly or seasonal festivals in which the authority
structure, including property rights, was systematically subverted under
a tradition rooted in the officially tolerated festivals that saw “the
world turned upside down” and the oppressed classes crowned as lords of
misrule. Mikhael Bakhtin found these rowdy upheavals in Rabelais and his
contemporaries and Eric Hobsbawm, discussing how to write “History from
Below,” argued that early festival-based episodes of rebellion could be
found emerging in official, often judicial records to counter the
authoritarian narrative provided by the literate elites. The sanction of
tradition for festival-based class upheavals was key to what has been
called the “weapons of the weak,” disruptive behavior somewhat sheltered
or permitted by primitive, actually pre-Christian tradition that
punctured whatever hegemonic hold the aristocracy had on everyday life –
at least during the course of the festival.

By the sixteenth century, a more formal critique of property and
conventional behavior rooted in part in the Reformation emerged (in
Western societies), one that didn’t need the cover of festival
tradition. The famous or (today) not so famous “Pope of Marxism” Karl
Kautsky examined, for instance, the rebel impulse in [*the Anabaptist
uprising led by Tomas
Munzer*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=17cc8c368f&e=003de9ccab)
in the sixteenth century. The most religious among that group renounced
property in total and held all things in common; others more practically
were as anti-propertarian as needed; they “have all things so far in
common that they allow no one among them to suffer want,” as Kautsky
quotes another scholar.   In a [*Jacobin
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8cf2ac7054&e=003de9ccab)
late last year, the contributor Loren Balhorn noted “Kautsky’s attempt
to reconstruct human history as a history of class struggles, in order
to imbue his readers with a sense of historical tradition, revolutionary
continuity, and moral obligation to the socialist future.”  The notion
of continuity with the past rather than one in which industrial
capitalism changes everything may have been Kautsky’s way of dealing
with the collapse of worker internationalism during the Great War,
contrary to classical Marxist dogma if not the more nuanced Marx
himself. But Kautsky’s purposive interpretation of the role of property
and its conceptual abolition weaves an important thread from history,
through Marxism, and into today’s notions of the roots of inequality.

Though the best-known festival of social topsy-turvy was in the
Saturnalia winter holiday, Twelfth Night tradition, it was no accident
that many of the festivals allowing for inversion of social relations
took place in the warmer months and we can take today’s April Fool’s Day
as the beginning of the protesting season, a potential renewal of the
spirit of Occupy that inverts property relations. The tradition of April
Fool’s Day as one for pranks played on others is a pale imitation of the
more robust (if temporary) uprising against property and authority in
the human past. As [*Steve Fraser’s new
book*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7fca535f3f&e=003de9ccab)
appears to ask: When will we stop giving consent and start demanding it?
Is this the prank we are playing on ourselves?

**EVENTS**\
Metro DC DSA’s **membership meeting** Saturday, April 11 will focus on
the upcoming steering committee elections; those who are interested in
joining the local’s executive committee should attend. The local’s
coalition work on the Fight for Fifteen minimum wage campaign will also
be discussed, and solidarity support for postal union workers.The
meeting is at 2:30 p.m. at the Watha T. Deniel/Shaw library, WTD meeting
room, 1630 7th St NW, Washington, DC. A steering committee meeting
precedes the general meeting, at 1 p.m. The Shaw/Howard U. metrorail
stop on the Yellow/Green line is just across the street from the
library.

The **Socialist Salon** is in a different location this month for good
reason… see the article below by Carolyn Byerly, DSA member and chair of
the Department of Communication, Culture and Media Studies at Howard
University. A film about the immensely influential theorist, teacher and
*New Left Review* co-founder Stuart Hall will be presented at Howard
Thursday, April 16, 7-9 p.m. in Room 118 of the [*C.B. Powell
Building*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ce081eda43&e=003de9ccab)
there, Bryant Street between 4^th^ and 6^th^ Streets NW. Consider taking
the 70 Metrobus from Georgia Ave/Petworth or Gallery Place Metrorail
stations.

Metro DC DSA is co-sponsoring [***Demystifying Syria – The Real Story
Behind
ISIS***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7922cbd284&e=003de9ccab)**,**
an April 11 forum in Rockville along with lead sponsor Peace Action
Montgomery. The bitter and largely misunderstood situation on the ground
in Iraq and Syria is outlined by some of the most well-informed analysts
in the U.S. Speakers are Phyllis Bennis of IPS, Raed Jarrar, policy
analyst for American Friends Service Committee, and Prof. Younes Benab
of Strayer University.   Questions, discussion and action plans to
oppose the violence are included. It’s Saturday, April 11, 7:00 p.m. at
Unitarian Universalist Church of Rockville[*, 100 Welsh Park Dr.,
Rockville*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=2944033362&e=003de9ccab).
This was originally scheduled for February but unusually bad weather
conditions caused its postponement.

**NOTE**: National DSA is in the early stages of updating its national
strategy documents.  Access to the draft is
[*here*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=64aa83e5db&e=003de9ccab).
The national DSA website also has aggregated [*numerous strategy
proposals*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=be10288816&e=003de9ccab)
on specific issues over the last several years. Locals, including this
one, will be participating in the shaping of this updated strategy for
socialism and social change.

**Keep up with events, including any changes, on our** [***Meetup
page***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=9a68611fd0&e=003de9ccab).

**IN THIS ISSUE**\
[***Stuart
Hall***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=80398277a2&e=003de9ccab),
a founder of the New Left Review and critical-cultural theorist who died
in 2014, is the subject of a much-praised biographical film that will be
shown at the Metro DC DSA Socialist Salon April 16 (details above).
*Carolyn Byerly*, who will host the event, explains why Hall’s work
continues to have explanatory power for socialists today and tomorrow.

At our March Salon, Chris Riddiough drew on her long personal experience
with the feminist movement to explain [***“Second Wave”
feminism***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=321f3066c8&e=003de9ccab).
*Lisa Foley Stand* reports on Riddiough’s talk and the response.\
As the FCC ruling on [***Net
Neutrality***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=55f86c2a8a&e=003de9ccab)
approached, Metro DC DSA members heard from Matt Wood, of the
progressive activist organization Free Press, about the tough battles to
follow the ruling. *Woody Woodruff* reports on what is at stake.

The struggle to wind down the appalling US [***incarceration state**
*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=dc46c417f4&e=003de9ccab)has
huge follow-up requirements to integrate ex-offenders successfully into
their communities and to end the school-to-prison cyle. *Kurt Stand*
reports from a recent local panel outlining the tasks.

Two [***DC
Council***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=9a3fb4f495&e=003de9ccab)
**seats** are up in a special election, and money (along with its
acolytes) appears to be fully in charge. *Bill Mosley* analyzes a
usual-suspects scenario.

The[ ***Maryland General
Assembly***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=14e3b1589e&e=003de9ccab)
is drawing to a mid-April close as Democratic legislators continue to
struggle with a Republican governor; several dispatches and alerts.

[***Books***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=09fd3ff1b8&e=003de9ccab)
by Astra Taylor and Andrew Keen are concerned with the Internet’s
effects on employment, inquiry and the culture (including the embattled
creators of culture). *Woody Woodruff* reviews two of the many books
that view capitalism’s role in cyberspace with considerable alarm.

[***Good Reads for
Socialists***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=9ef498493b&e=003de9ccab)
– recent articles that you may have missed, with links.

**You can read these and other past articles in the *Washington
Socialist* on our website where they are archived,**
[***dsadc.org***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=5e9357229b&e=003de9ccab)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*A Fresh Look at the Second
Wave*](http://dsadc.org/a-fresh-look-at-the-second-wave/)

Tuesday, March 31st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2015**

*By Lisa Foley Stand*

*“Jane’s not here. But we can have her get in touch with you.” The
caller is a woman with an unwanted pregnancy. Jane is the solution of
her choosing – a safe but unlawful abortion performed by a skilled but
anonymous woman of the Jane Collective, a project of the Chicago Women’s
Liberation Union in the 1960s.*

Jane is not here now either. Abortion was legalized to a degree by the
Supreme Court’s 1973 interpretation of the Fourth Amendment. Since then,
however, countless new anti-choice laws have been passed and upheld. 
For many women in 2015, abortion is no more available than it was in the
1960s. Women still need Jane.

What Jane represents in a broad sense and how to get in touch with her
today – these are key questions for socialist feminism, and matters
explored in a recent salon with Chris Riddiough. The March 19 program,
“Second Wave Feminism: A History and Evaluation,” was co-sponsored by
DC-DSA and DC NOW (National Organization for Women) and drew an audience
of 20-30 people.

Riddiough is a former leader of the CWLU (which disbanded in 1977), as
well as an honorary DSA vice chair and past chair of the DSA Feminist
Commission. Her talk touched on aspects of the women’s liberation
movement that can now be seen as distinct in the larger frame of the
women’s rights agenda of the ’60s and ‘70s.

One aspect, Riddiough noted, was the tendency to “understand the
movement for women’s liberation as part of the larger movement for peace
and justice.” Because many women’s liberation leaders had experience in
civil rights and anti-war efforts of the day, they viewed the “struggle
for women’s rights as not isolated from other struggles,” and believed
that gender theory and strategy had to bridge the intersections with
concerns of race and class.

Along with attention to theory came discovery of a historical
perspective, as women collectively pursued and shared knowledge of past
women’s movements (in times predating Women’s Studies in academic
settings). As a guide to their work, members referred to the “Juliet
Mitchell Chart,” adapted from the writings of British socialist feminist
Juliet Mitchell.

The chart identified four roles occupied by women in society in which
they are oppressed: production, reproduction, sexuality, and socializers
of children. It was helpful to refer to these roles and the particular
experience of oppression in them when defining areas of struggle.

Yet, while CWLU members did debate theory and were dedicated to a
collective process of setting strategy, they were not about finding and
following a “correct line,” Riddiough said. In practice, the CWLU was
committed to engaging women in activist programs that “met them where
they were,” which led to collective work on a range of issues and
priorities defined by members themselves– health care, lesbian rights,
access to public space for women’s athletics, self-defense, as examples.
Some of this work led to gains recognized today in Title IX in
education, establishment of lesbian and gay rights, and increasingly
strong LGBT presences in politics and culture.

On the other hand, as Riddiough acknowledged with nods of assent from
listeners, results fell far short of some aims, and in other areas women
have lost ground after short-term gains. Anti-feminist backlash seems
particularly strong against efforts on many fronts to stop rape, sexual
assault, and violence against women. Reproductive freedom, as noted, has
been under constant attack. The degree of women’s autonomy over their
own bodies – individually or collectively – is still the most basic
measure of women’s freedom. For that, much struggle lies ahead, perhaps
most of all in two of Juliet Mitchell’s four domains — production and
reproduction.

So, again, how do we get in touch with Jane?

In Riddiough’s closing remarks, she offers a few suggestions. Though the
CWLU ultimately disbanded as the Reagan era began to overpower the era
of a new left in the ‘60s and ‘70s, the organization left a solid
legacy. So, “first, we need to know our history. When I talk to women
who were active in the ‘60s and ‘70s, I hear over and over, ‘We knew
nothing about the struggles that came before us.’ In school, for
instance, history books had a sentence or two – if that – about the
women’s suffrage movement, for instance.” The lack of knowledge and
sense of continuity with past movements “led us to reinvent the idea of
feminism. Young feminists today don’t have to do that if they learn the
lessons of the past.”

Her second suggestion, almost an urging, is about what it means to be
strategic. “The political right with its War on Women has been really
good at this.” Keep a long view, accept that some victories will not be
lasting, and use theoretical and strategic tools for action. “Internet
petition drives, hashtags that disappear in a few days, will not be
enough to counter the right wing war.”

Finally, Riddiough affirmed the importance of strong organizations
capable of supporting effective leaders, noting the seemingly weak
structures of the short-lived Occupy movement. This point always
resonates in a roomful of socialists and socialist feminists, often
pulled away from an organizational center even as they have impact in
other compatible movements.

There was Jane. But there was also the Jane Collective.

For more information about the Chicago Women’s Liberation Union, visit
the CWLU Herstory
[*website*](http://www.uic.edu/orgs/cwluherstory/CWLUAbout/about.html).

[*DC DSA member meeting hears of next struggles in Net
Neutrality*](http://dsadc.org/dc-dsa-member-meeting-hears-of-next-struggles-in-net-neutrality/)

Tuesday, March 31st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* April 2015**

*By Woody Woodruff*

The Feb. 26 date for the FCC decision on Net Neutrality was looming
close as Metro DC DSA heard [*Free Press*](http://www.freepress.net/)’s
Matt Wood on the subject at the membership meeting Feb. 15. Wood’s theme
was clear: the amount of corporate money engaged in this contest of
titans means the FCC decision (which looked favorable to consumers and
the concept of net neutrality at that point) would just be the first
skirmish in a long contest.

The [*FCC’s 3-2, party line
vote*](http://dsadc.org/activism-pushed-fcc-ruling-on-net-neutrality/)
to reclassify internet providers as common carriers under Title II of
the FCC’s own enabling legislation was a solid win for consumers and
creators using the Net – which after all is based historically on a
publicly funded US government “Arpanet” created by military and civilian
researchers. And, as Wood stated, classification of internet providers
as common carriers would return the state of play to that in place
before George W. Bush’s FCC chair, Michael Powell, decided against that
status for the then-burgeoning Net business. The major telcom players
had pushed for that non-decision. Powell is now the well-paid head of
the cable and telecommunications lobby, NCTA.

The big players – Comcast and Time Warner, Verizon and AT&T – had been
lobbying to keep their FCC classification as information services, not
as common carriers/utilities, because reclassification as utilities
would give the federal regulators far more control over their services,
treatment of consumers and producers, and pricing.

As Wood warned at the DSA meeting several weeks prior to the ruling, it
won’t end there. Corporate profits for those big players depend on
maintaining control – over prices and offerings, and over lawmakers whom
they now will enlist to push back against the FCC. Marsha Blackburn, a
rising member of the House GOP leadership, [*has filed a
bill*](http://act.freepress.net/sign/internet_nn_blackburn/?source=website_default)
that would overturn the FCC ruling. She and the bill’s co-sponsors have
hauled in several hundreds of thousands of dollars in campaign
contributions from the major corporate players. And attorneys for the
same corporate players have [*already filed two
suits*](http://www.freepress.net/blog/2015/03/24/here-come-lawyers-first-net-neutrality-lawsuits-filed)
to overturn the FCC ruling as well.

Even though the astonishing outpouring of public comment on net
neutrality pushed both FCC chair Charles Wheeler and even President
Obama to endorse a stronger stance, Free Press and other anti-corporate
Net activists face a formidable struggle to shore up the FCC ruling now
that it’s in force, Wood recounted.

And the overall regulatory environment is still conditioned by the 1996
Telecommunications Act, which is generally an industry-friendly,
deregulatory statute, as DSA member Carolyn Byerly, a professor of
communications at Howard University, pointed out. That gives
conservative appeals courts like the DC Circuit room to pick away at the
FCC’s stance.

The FCC majority grasped that corporate control was endangering the
freedom and accessibility of the Internet, a game-changing technology.
The strong stance that they took was not, unfortunately, the end of the
story. It must be written by activists ready to fight corporations as
they try to buy back what democracy took from their hands.

[*DC Politics Roundup: Progressives Continue to Eye DC Special Council
Elections*](http://dsadc.org/dc-politics-roundup-progressives-continue-to-eye-dc-special-council-elections/)

Tuesday, March 31st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

With the special elections to fill two DC Council vacancies less than a
month away, progressive DC voters are still trying to make sense of the
cattle call of candidates in both of the contested wards – with 14
running in Ward 4 and 16 in Ward 8 – while many of the left-of-center
organizations that routinely endorse candidates have yet to make their
picks.

While the herd of hopefuls is scurrying to make an impression on DC
voters in what is likely to be a low-turnout election, they also are
eager to pick up endorsements that may sway undecided voters and bring a
last-minute surge of money and volunteer energy into their campaigns.

In the election for the Ward 4 Council seat, which Muriel Bowser vacated
when she became mayor, Bowser’s hand-picked successor Brandon Todd — her
former campaign and Council aide — is sucking up much of the oxygen and
money, and it will take courage for any organization that depends on
friends in DC government to oppose him.  Things are a little more fluid
in Ward 8, the stronghold of the late Councilmember and former Mayor
Marion Barry.  Here Bowser is also playing kingmaker by endorsing former
Barry aide LaRuby May, who has a large lead in fundraising.  However, a
few other candidates have enough of a name or record to possibly make a
push, such as longtime DC voting-rights advocate Eugene D. Kinlow,
former DC Shadow Representative Nate Bennett Fleming, and Marion C.
Barry, the late councilmember’s son.

(For more information on some of the leading candidates in each ward,
see [*this article in last month’s *Washington
Socialist**](http://dsadc.org/dc-politics-roundup-democracy-takes-a-back-seat-in-dc-special-elections/)).

One of the most-watched endorsements is that of the Metropolitan
Washington AFL-CIO’s Council on Political Education (COPE), which is
evaluating the candidates in preparation for endorsing but as of press
time for the *Socialist* had not yet announced its picks.  DC for
Democracy, a multi-issue progressive group, has announced it will make
its endorsements on April 8.  The Gertrude Stein Democratic Club, the
influential LGBT group, is also studying the candidates in preparation
for endorsement.

One notable group that has already made endorsements is the local
chapter of the Sierra Club, giving its nods to Todd and Kinlow.  The
club’s
[*website*](http://dc.sierraclub.org/content/dc-chapter-sierra-club-pleased-announce-endorsements-april-28-2015-special-election)
indicates the endorsement of Todd, in particular, was based less on his
skimpy environmental record than on his responses to a questionnaire and
his meetings with club leaders, while Kinlow was recognized for his role
in local environmental-justice activism.

Metro-DC DSA has no plans to make endorsements in the races.

The real question is:  How many voters will care whom these
organizations endorse?  The answer is:  probably very few, but in a
close race with a large field of candidates, a key endorsement or two
could make the swing enough votes to influence the outcome.  This could
be the case in the more competitive Ward 8 election; in Ward 4 the
question is whether anyone can stop the Bowser/Todd juggernaut.

**DC Government Takes More Confrontational Stance Toward Congress**

Mayor Bowser can be credited with the DC government’s at least somewhat
more assertive posture in confronting congressional attacks on home
rule.  Her determination to move ahead with implementing the
voter-approved initiative to legalize marijuana, in the face of threats
from Republican members and even a provision in the DC budget
challenging legalization, is evidence of this new attitude.

More recently, she said she would not pursue the litigation initiated by
former Mayor Vince Gray to overturn a referendum that unilaterally
declared the District free from the congressional budget process.  Gray
and his attorney general Irving Nathan took the legalistic argument that
notwithstanding DC’s desire to stop Capitol Hill from meddling in its
local affairs, the Constitution gives Congress legislative authority
over the District.  But for DC voters as well as Bowser and members of
DC Council who supported the referendum, that was beside the point:  DC,
especially in the face of a more hostile Congress, will get nowhere
politely requesting its rights; it must demand them.  The District’s
goal is to become a state, and Bowser and allied members of the Council
deserve a hand for trying to make DC act like one.

However, the attacks from the Republican Congress keep coming.  The
latest assault is from arch-conservative Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, who
introduced a bill to overturn two progressive measures enacted by the
local government – one that would ban employers from discriminating
against workers for using birth control or seeking an abortion, and the
other to require educational institutions affiliated with religions,
such as Georgetown University and Catholic University, to comply with
the city’s law banning anti-gay discrimination.  While such a
stand-alone bill stands little chance of passage – this Congress is
hardly capable of agreeing on what day of the week it is – Cruz’s
posturing is more proof that DC will never be free of congressional
interference until it achieves its goal of statehood.

[*Economic (and cultural) consequences of the
Internet*](http://dsadc.org/economic-and-cultural-consequences-of-the-internet/)

Tuesday, March 31st, 2015

*By Woody Woodruff*

***Review: The People’s Platform: Taking Back Power and Culture in the
Digital Age* by Astra Taylor. Metropolitan Books/Henry Holt 2014**.

***The Internet is Not the Answer* by Andrew Keen**. **Atlantic Monthly
Press 2015**

Astra Taylor’s examination of the cultural consequences of an Internet
under increasing capitalist control sits in the midst of a flock of
books that have taken on the varying parts of this puzzle.

Some lament the effects on today’s minds of low-friction information
availability (often comparing it unfavorably with the pre-digital
learning process, which we should remember privileged an elite of the
learned who could afford access to education and books. “Is the Internet
making us stupid?” asked writer Nicholas Carr – as if the milieu created
by class-privileged access to knowledge has turned out so wonderfully
for the masses. Others argue that the convergence of creation and
consumption on the Internet is breaking down the old relationship
between creator and public or consumer – and they cheer it. Taylor does
not.

Andrew Keen, like Taylor, instead looks with dismay at the rising
inequality and job destruction that is resulting from many of the
internet-related businesses rising on the ruins (more or less) of the
industrial era. His concern is tonally different than hers – she is
worried about the easy expropriation of intellectual property and the
degradation of cultural life that has paralleled the supposed glories of
an “information wants to be free” ethos. Keen, whose contempt (and envy)
for the new, young overlords of Net business is unbounded, builds a case
around numerous narratives of the degradation of communal life and
employment in company towns like Rochester, N.Y. (Eastman Kodak, now
defunct, leaving a hollowed-out and impoverished home base) and San
Francisco, being gentrified and hollowed out from nearby by the new
feudal barons of Silicon Valley.

Taylor, a journalist and documentary filmmaker, focuses on the
conformations of the net and its associated businesses that are
squeezing creative people – artists, musicians, journalists and authors
of both fact and fiction – out of the cash nexus. As this is happening,
corporate interests take a larger and larger share of the monetization
of the net while the public for these cultural goods gets more and more
“free” content while paying heavily in other ways.

Advertising is the true coin of net commerce, driving significant
business to Amazon and other netrepreneurs. Taylor calls advertising a
\$700 billion invisible “private tax” levied on the public, the internet
user, and sealing further the fate of creative people who are
increasingly asked to create for free in order to participate in
cyber-distribution. The rivers of Europe that in the late middle ages
were littered with gangs operating as tollkeepers at every defensible
bend in their course have their counterpart in today’s heavily trammeled
Internet.

As vast and unmanageable as the Internet appears to the non-coder, it is
“vulnerable to capture by the private interests we depend on for
access,” Taylor observes, not too originally. But she weaves a
significant and different narrative about the loss of power and control
by the public as corporate forces inject the fluid of commerce into
every bend in the Internet’s “pipes.”

Many people, including some on the progressive and radical left,
continue to see the Internet as a vehicle for revolutionary change
because of its wide, low-cost potential for outreach. Taylor has a
glummer view: the Internet has already largely been captured by
capitalist forces and will be hard to pry from their clutches.

Keen, who is frank about his own failure to get traction as an early
dot.com entrepreneur in the transition of music from CD to online,
agrees and highlights the contradiction: “…while Paul Baran, Vint Cerf
and Tim Berners-Lee consciously designed the Internet to be without a
center, that distributed architecture hasn’t been extended to the
all-important realms of money or power. Here, the future is actually as
*bordered* as the past.” (italics in original) He later quotes
journalist/historian John Naughton: “In Darwinian terms these new
corporate giants are just the latest stage in the evolution of the
public corporation.” Their goals— maximized profits, benefits to
shareholders and CEOs, and rejection of unions, taxes and regulation –
parallel those of the robber barons of the Gilded Age, Naughton
continues, and they differ mainly in “hiring far fewer people.”

Tim Wu (author of *The Master Switch*) could have been summarizing the
views of both in his NYT review of Taylor’s book: “Instead of serving as
the great equalizer, the web has created an abhorrent cultural
feudalism. The creative masses connect, create and labor, while Google,
Facebook and Amazon collect the cash.”\*

Wu goes on to say “virality is the promise that keeps the proletariat
toiling in the cultural factories, instead of revolting and asking for
something better.”

Wu, in 2010’s *Master Switch,* expertly showed how natural monopolies
like telegraph, telephone, radio and television services overplay their
hands under capitalist management and become fodder for regulation or
even nationalization. He shares Taylor’s concerns about a similar
phenomenon wrecking the Internet before it can be wrenched to the proper
use of the broad public. The struggle over “net neutrality” (a term
credited to Wu as originator) has brought [*flashes of
pushback*](http://dsadc.org/activism-pushed-fcc-ruling-on-net-neutrality/)
from the wide public that uses, and sometimes creates, on this
forty-year-old but continually “new” phenomenon. But capitalism, as
always, starts better organized and the struggle is continual catch-up.

Radicals in this game have to struggle just to avoid disorientation. A
phenomenon disruptive of capitalism as it exists has to be the
love-object of any self-respecting revolutionary, right? But the ethic
of the Internet skews that notion. Taylor quotes the knotty formulation
of Internet apostle Clay Shirky.  His “Shirky Principle” – “institutions
will try to preserve the problem to which they are the solution” –
exemplifies for Taylor the ambivalent attitude that apostles of the
disruptive qualities of online opportunity take toward the traditional
one-way means of communication like broadcasting, TV and print news.
Shirky, a popular media scholar, is one such, applauding the removal of
the traditional gatekeepers from the mesh, or field (as Bourdieu would
have it) of communication*. Here Comes Everybody*, Shirky titled his
seminal book. Nevertheless, acknowledge Shirky and his compatriots, the
material provided online is essentially what used to be available
through the old media varieties –   video, radio, news, entertainment,
music. All that has changed is who is making money from it. The
sociologist Bourdieu said that the “field” of communicative action was
characterized by unequal power relations, and that in fact the powerful
elements in the field employ communicative action to enforce their
status. It’s productive to explore, as Taylor and Keen do, what has
really changed and what remains.

Keen probably has an even better array than Taylor of examples showing
that the power relations of this communication “field” are disrupted by
the Internet but the result is an even more concentrated set of power
relations – Internet entrepreneurs who dominate the field while
employing almost nobody – and a proletariat of the Net that produces and
consumes, but for whom the meter always runs the wrong way, pumping
money in the direction of the narrowing group of powerful entrepreneurs.

Taylor’s caution, similarly, is that the old gatekeepers of content
(publishers, broadcast outlets) have been replaced by new gatekeepers of
the new mesh, the once-free World Wide Web. They are the Internet
Service Providers who must be paid for access to the Web at all, as well
as the lords of content and access like Google and Yahoo. Social media
enablers like Facebook and Twitter occupy a slightly different sphere
but are equally capitalist aggregators of eyeballs and access points –
and money.

Keen especially focuses on the background oligarchy of the ISPs: the
U.S. government “handed over the running of the Internet backbone to
commercial Internet service providers.” It was, Keen quoting here the
words of venture capitalist John Doerr, “ ‘the largest legal creation of
wealth in the history of the planet.’ ”

Taylor’s approach, says Michael Harris in a WaPo review of Keen’s book,
pushes to a “more unabashedly Marxist conclusion.”\*\* Certainly she
touches many a lefty base: C. Wright Mills’s extension of the concept of
“alienated labor” to the middle management sphere in the ‘60s, adding
“If we want to see the fruits of technological advances widely shared,
it will require conscious effort and political struggle.”

Taylor notes John Lennon’s scornful view of the “clever and classless
and free” self-image of folk in the US who are unable to grasp their own
imprisonment in a deliberately covert class system.  She suggests that
makes it easy for them to embrace the notion that “information wants to
be free.” Equally erosive of class consciousness is the well-cultivated
Tea-Partyish resentment against cultural elites and expert authority,
which emphatically is not “striking a blow against the real powers.”
Such feckless misdirection of thinking is not limited to the Right.

Tackling the actual inequities and power differentials of capitalist
society, she recognizes, is difficult for ordinary folk whose time is
consumed by various dimensions of survival. “Motivation and resources,
time and power – these are not assets that are evenly distributed,”
Taylor asserts. And, we socialists would add, this is no accident, but a
singular advantage of capitalism, to fill up the overscheduled daily
lives of workers and consumers with coerced activities suffused with
anxiety or outright fear of losing even a precarious foothold. Popular
democratic activism is well tied down by these constraints. In the brave
new world of the Internet, Taylor says, “material and social conditions
have not given way to will and imagination,” contrary to the
world-has-changed evangelism of Shirky and others.

Taylor’s concern includes the hollowing out of the creative process,
with its consumers increasingly expecting free creative content, the new
moguls of the Internet collecting a hidden tax from those consumers and
the creators of cultural goods left with little or nothing to show for
their labors.

This is a sad truth that was true before the Internet and will probably
be true in the next iteration of human communication, whatever that
looks like.  The Net may have exacerbated this trend but it hardly
initiated it.

Worse, she argues, the pressure on creators has caused a race to the
middle, with fewer and fewer genuinely radical, evocative voices and
blander and blander, politically harmless content. For the capitalist
overlords of culture, it is a reduction of risk.

For her fellow creators, Taylor calls for a shift “from free culture to
fair culture” with established fair trade principles and a wider culture
in which that fairness is encouraged. In contrast, “a communication
system left to the free market will not produce the independent,
democratic culture we need. … while the Internet could have offered an
alternative to the sphere of commodity exchange, private and often
monopolistic markets now dominate.”

Taylor suggest some market-socialist solutions that could help dislodge
capital’s foot from the neck of Internet and its users – industrial
policy, state investment in the electronic infrastructure and research,
with “public option” alternatives for Internet access. In fact, the FCC
recently took steps to block industry-backed state laws prohibiting
municipal wi-fi systems – a small shred of progress. Another Taylor
proposal, a staple of European social democracies, is vastly increased
spending on public broadcasting pegged to a sales tax on our electronic
toys – and for commercial stations and networks to “pay a market rate
for spectrum licenses” and a national sales tax on online sales, now
levied only by some states and easily dodged by big corporations and
their in-house tax lawyers.

The cash cow provided by the Internet to big corporations, after all,
was originally derived from government R&D and public efforts like
DARPA, where the Net was engendered – the free lunch for the
corporations, she says, should stop and they should pay for what they
are enjoying.

Taylor, like Keen, falls into a difficult ravine, suggesting that
valuable cultural goods are produced by a relatively small group of
cultural creators who should be compensated therefore. Both push back
against the democratic yawp of Shirky and others, who celebrate the
access of ordinary folks to the tools of cultural creation and
grassroots political discourse. In doing so they undervalue a real
benefit of the Net, suggesting instead that the common sort has been
narcotized by social-media brain candy, the “cultural dupes” of
old-school, mass-society media theorists.

Social media are in fact a fascinating amalgam of brain candy and real
sociopolitical stimulation, and offer as low-friction an opportunity for
expression by all as history has provided so far. Keen and some of his
cohorts – Nicholas Carr and others – feel the Internet has devalued
knowledge by lowering the difficulty of gaining it. This seems a bit of
sour grapes.

One can see why Harris suggested in his review that Taylor had a more
nuanced revolutionary perspective, even “Marxist,” compared to Keen.
Keen’s sources are more other journalism and less thoughtful analysis,
and the tonal difference between Keen’s sometimes-shrill denunciations
of Internet billionaires and Taylor’s focus on their consequences is
distinct. Both are in fact “Marxist” in the general sense that they
recognize structural tendencies in capitalism itself that exacerbate
inequality in information and its increasingly important
commodification, while actively working against its remediation.

Both writers provide plenty of illustrative examples of those structural
tendencies as they play out in the terrain of e-commerce.

Keen’s narrative and examples are more rococo and gossipy than Taylor’s
(Keen cheerfully refers to Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg as “autistic”) and
in many ways a more fun read. His encounters with some of the princes
(ain’t no princesses) of Silicon Valley and its posh outposts in San
Francisco make them seem nearly clownish in their degree of detachment
from the society they count as customers.

Taylor’s focus on the way Internet discourse defaults toward the
mediocre under financial pressures is a more useful, because less
common, critique. These are two of a number of books that, taken
together, keep us current on the remarkable impact of new technology on
our lives and jobs, as well as the persistent truths about the behavior
of powerful corporations in capitalist society.

\*”Content and its Discontents,” July 18 2014

\*\*Michael Harris, *The Washington Post*, Jan. 2, 2015

[*Good Reads for Socialists:
April*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-april/) 2015

Tuesday, March 31st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2015**

Brentin Mock, Justice correspondent for the politico-enviro site
*Grist*, explores the relationship of climate change and gentrification
(in all its forms) in a thoughtful and novel way. *Grist* has been
running a series on gentrification; links are with this one:
[*http://grist.org/living/climate-change-is-the-ultimate-gentrifier/*](http://grist.org/living/climate-change-is-the-ultimate-gentrifier/)

Tom Edsall, in *the New York Times*, details the seismic shift among
some prominent, formerly neolib economists – Larry Summers at the
forefront – in the direction of interventionist and regulatory action to
increase jobs and job demand.
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/04/opinion/establishment-populism-rising.html?ref=opinion&\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/04/opinion/establishment-populism-rising.html?ref=opinion&_r=0)

Naomi Klein’s work, including the book *This Changes Everything*, has
coalesced a lot of climate-change discussions into a capital-T Thread
that is encompassing quite a lot of the ongoing work of activist
thinkers. Jodi Dean, in her blog I Cite. responds that “This Changes
Some Things” and argues that Klein backs away from the clear
revolutionary imperative that climate change conditions imply. As often
happens, this was placed center stage by a Doug Henwood Facebook post.
[*http://jdeanicite.typepad.com/i\_cite/2015/03/this-changes-some-things.html*](http://jdeanicite.typepad.com/i_cite/2015/03/this-changes-some-things.html)

All of us being artists in our own lives if not more, we hear from Toni
Morrison in the *Nation*’s 150th-anniversary issue about the duty to
resist that is imposed on all artists in dark times. “Forcing a nation
to use force is easy when the citizenry is rife with discontent,
experiencing feelings of a powerlessness that can be easily soothed by
violence.”\
[*http://www.thenation.com/article/198465/no-place-self-pity-no-room-fear?utm\_source=facebook&utm\_medium=socialflow\#*](http://www.thenation.com/article/198465/no-place-self-pity-no-room-fear?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=socialflow%23)

Two books on the new dot-com boom detail the way e-commerce has
sharpened inequality and unemployment in the robotics age. How about the
people who work for the dot-coms? An article *in In These Times* focuses
on coders, among the new oppressed. This was first posted by
*Portside*.\
[*http://inthesetimes.com/working/entry/17773/coders\_are\_becoming\_the\_industrial\_workers\_of\_the\_21st\_century.\_will\_they\_o*](http://inthesetimes.com/working/entry/17773/coders_are_becoming_the_industrial_workers_of_the_21st_century._will_they_o)

Tom Edsall, again (his long analyses in the *NYT* are becoming
must-reads) – this time about measures of poverty and judging the
relative success or failure of antipoverty policy since Lyndon Johnson…\
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/25/opinion/how-poor-are-the-poor.html?ref=opinion*](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/25/opinion/how-poor-are-the-poor.html?ref=opinion)

There’s not much new in this recent update on the Trans Pacific
Partnership trade boondoggle, some of the secrets of which have been
outed by WikiLeaks. But Jim Hightower has a way of putting things that
can help refresh your own arguments against Fast Track authority…
[*http://www.alternet.org/news-amp-politics/jim-hightower-obamas-terrible-trade-pact-scam-must-be-stopped*](http://www.alternet.org/news-amp-politics/jim-hightower-obamas-terrible-trade-pact-scam-must-be-stopped)

[*Locked Out and then Locked Up: Ending the Injustice of our Justice
System*](http://dsadc.org/locked-out-and-then-locked-up-ending-the-injustice-of-our-justice-system/)

Tuesday, March 31st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2015**

** ***By Kurt Stand*

“I have been locked by the lawless.\
Handcuffed by the haters.\
Gagged by the greedy.

And, if i know anything at all,\
It’s that a wall is just a wall\
And nothing more at all.\
It can be broken down.

I believe in living\
I believe in birth\
I believe in the sweat of love\
And in the fire of truth.

And i believe that a lost ship,\
Steered by tired, seasick sailors,\
Can still be guided home\
To port.”

Assata Shakur

 

The majority of people imprisoned by our criminal justice system are in
the 18-24 year age range when arrested; the likelihood of being charged
with committing a crime dropping significantly with each passing year
thereafter.  Yet time spent in jail or prison reduces an individual’s
life chances in every respect, thus those caught in a prosecutorial web
when young are penalized for a length of time far outlasting a prison
sentence.  This reality was the theme of a panel discussion sponsored by
the Reentry Network for Returning Citizens at the Thurgood Marshall
Center in Northwest DC on Wednesday, February 25.   The purpose of the
meeting, wrote Executive Director Courtney Stewart, was to “continue the
conversation to end the school to prison pipeline, end mass
incarceration, recommend and create more alternatives to prison and
diversion programs.  The law says that a boy becomes a man at age 18,
well many of us know that is not necessarily true in the case of our
youth.  So why are so many ending up in the criminal justice system with
little chance of ever getting their life back together?”

Each of the panelists — Tracy Valazquez, Council for Court Excellence;
Malik Burnett, Drug Policy Alliance; Marcy Mistrett, Campaign for Youth
Justice; Reginald Williamson, Public Defender Service; Walter Johnson,
Collaborative Solutions for Communities; and community activist Tony
Lewis — spoke about the concrete programs or outreach efforts they are
engaged in, yet they all also stressed that incremental changes,
important as they are, need to be followed by more basic changes.  The
point was repeatedly made by panelists and by attendees commenting from
the floor that taking youth away from the young through incarceration
exemplifies the inhumanity of a system which victimizes people already
victimized by poverty.  Individuals with the fewest life chances in our
highly inegalitarian society are those most likely to wind up in prison
when they should be receiving an education or embarking on a career.  In
other words, those “locked out” become those “locked up.”

Although recent years have shown some small improvement with the overall
rate of incarceration (in DC and across the country) dropping, the
absolute number of those in jail or prison is still growing.  
Nationally and locally some sentence reduction measures (such as
marijuana decriminalization/legalization) have been enacted, some
programs to ease the process of re-entry have been funded; however,
while welcome these have failed to turn the problem around because
counter-trends continue to marginalize and criminalize parts of the
population.  Gentrification is a prime example and has had a
particularly harmful effect in our region where rising cost  of housing
is reinforcing pre-existing patterns of exclusion based on race and
class – thereby making it especially difficult for young people to get a
foothold in the economy even when they are employed.  And the racial
disproportion when it comes to arrest and sentencing is especially
striking amongst young men; blacks between the ages of 18-19 are more
than 9 times likely to be imprisoned than whites.  According to the
Bureau of Justice, almost 3% of black men were imprisoned on December
31, 2013, as were about 1% of Hispanic and 0.5% of white men (even that
last number is itself far higher than what most other countries would
tolerate).  Meanwhile the percentage of women in prison rises from year
to year – also especially impacting youth.  Overall approximately
250,000 teenagers under the age of 18 are annually prosecuted in the
adult criminal justice system.

The combination of repressive laws and racism is thus having a
devastating impact on our society, on our democracy.  The challenge is
multi-fold – as meeting participants noted, the problems relate not only
to excessive sentencing and unnecessary imprisonment, but also lack of
funding for schools, housing, mental health services; a lack of jobs for
youth, and a lack of jobs for people returning home after time in
prison.  Numerous initiatives are underway locally to address aspects of
these problems – from the passage of ban the box legislation in DC
(preventing employers from asking about criminal backgrounds on job
applications), to the creation of job training and placement programs. 
Invaluable in and of themselves, these are preventing the existing
problems from getting worse, and make the difference between building a
life and struggling simply to survive for those whom they reach.  But by
themselves they do not go far enough – a more systemic solution is
needed, rooted in a critique of the structures that create and sustain a
society that locks out and locks up so many.

Such critiques and solutions are posed by articles written by political
prisoners, prisoner rights activists, radical scholars – including
Angela Davis, Sekou Odinga, Laura Whitehorn, Kevin “Rashid” Johnson — in
the quarterly journal, ***Socialism and Democracy***.  Having as its
theme “The Roots of Mass Incarceration in the US: Locking up Black
Dissidents and Punishing the Poor,” the issue was edited by Mumia
Abu-Jamal and Johanna Fernandez.  They pose the underlying problem in
their introduction: “While mass incarceration addressed the problem of
redundant labor in urban centers and functioned as a tool of social
control, it served ideological purposes as well.  During this period
\[1980s-90s\], crime became the new code word for black people, Latinos,
and increasingly, for immigrants.  These groups became the perfect
scapegoats in the context of growing class stratification in US
society.  In response to the broader national economic crisis, US
capital shored up its profits through a draconian project that cut
wages, eliminated health benefits, and busted unions.  The hysteria
around crime on which mass incarceration was erected served as an
important ideological tool, a kind of a palliative for disgruntled white
workers and the middle class during this long period of economic
austerity. … The unrelenting criminalization of African Americans and of
poor Latino communities over the last 35 years – the idea that these
undeserving “Others” were taking advantage of the system and digging
Americans deeper into a financial hole – was integral to the politics of
neo-liberalism, deployed by Democrats and Republicans alike …” (p.9)

The challenge is to take the truth of that reality and connect it with
the necessary work of individuals and organizations working for economic
and social justice in other spheres of life as well as with those
directly focused on reforming all aspects of the criminal justice
system.  An example of what this might look like was provided by Vijay
Prashad in a ***Socialism and Democracy*** article that points to a
different model of economic growth than the models pushed by liberals
and even some progressives unable to see outside of the neo-liberal box.
Writing about Newark, New Jersey, the road he suggests ought to be taken
should be viewed as directly relevant to what we need to advocate in our
communities, especially now with Mayor Muriel Bowser determining the
course of action her administration will follow in Washington, DC and
with political changes underway in suburban Maryland and Northern
Virginia.

Prashad notes that, “\[municipal government could use\] laws of eminent
domain to seize whatever abandoned property is in the city limits; use
funds from the city budget, from the stimulus bill and elsewhere to hire
people from the neighborhoods to refurbish these buildings into
community centers, daycare centers, local schools, indoor farmers’
markets and petty workshops; turn the empty lots into gardens to grow
edible crops and flowers, which can be sold.  Put the unions and
community organizations into the mix … using their organizational
capacity and experience as well as their budgets to reconstruct their
urban landscape.  Dramatic use of people’s energies would help break the
apathy and helplessness that leads to criminality, drug use, and poor
nutrition.”

This speaks to precisely the kinds of initiatives and projects the
attendees at the Reentry Network for Returning Citizens forum were
engaged with or looking to develop.  Key is to find policies and
practices that reach more than isolated individuals, but rather speak to
and organize all who are impacted by corporate/political practices that
undermine communities and lead people to blame themselves – or each
other — for their particular plight.  That too means breaking with the
pious sounding notion that anyone can achieve anything and focus on
changing structures that can enable people to turn wishes onto
realities.  Prashad’s conclusion expresses that truth: “there is no
point preaching hope alone, for hope can sour if it does not come with
either the concrete capacity of a popular movement or a concrete
recognition of possible public policies.  As the writer Lemony Snicket
put it, ‘A story about people inside impressive buildings ignoring or
even taunting people outside shouting at them turns out to be a story
with an unhappy ending.’  It is necessary to consider better endings,
which are themselves new beginnings – considerations of the needs of the
people who have no wish to live lives of desperation and
incarceration.”   Better endings that may help steer us all to port.

All quotes from ***Socialism and Democracy***, Vol. 28, Number 3,
November 2014

Assata Shakur’s poem quoted by Joseph Ramsay, “Revolutionary
Relatability: *Assata: An Autobiography* as a Site of Radical Teaching
and Learning.” (pp 124-125)

Mumia Abu-Jamal and Johanna Fernandez, “Locking Up Black Dissidents and
Punishing the Poor: The Roots of Mass Incarceration in the US,” (p 9)

Vijay Prashad, “Towards a Happy Ending,” (pp. 33-34)

 

Other Sources:

*Cardozo Law Review*

Liz Ryan, Youth in the Adult Criminal Justice System, Vol. 35:1167, 2012

Office of Human Rights: District of Columbia

Criminal Background Screenings and Employment – Fact Sheet for Job
Applicants, December 17 2014

Re-Entry Network for Returning Citizens Fact Sheets:

a)    African American Males in Criminal Justice

b)   African American Males in Education

c)    African American Males in Finance

d)   African American Males and the Family

 

Vera Center on Sentencing and Corrections:

“Incarceration’s Front Door: The Misuse of Jails in America,” Report
Summary, February 2015

[*Maryland Notes: Assembly Getting Down To
It*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-notes-assembly-getting-down-to-it/)

Tuesday, March 31st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2015**

As mid-April’s *sine die* finish for the Maryland General Assembly
approaches, significant pressure points are emerging in the legislative
session and other high-hopes projects are fading. A very Democratic
Assembly is fighting the state’s statutorily strong executive power now
wielded by a Republican governor.

A labor activist working for the state AFL-CIO agenda reports “The
budget is our main priority.  Hogan is trying to get rid of the pay
increase for state workers, \[and we’re also fighting\] his cuts to
education, and using the transportation trust fund to balance the
budget. \[We are supporting\] the Red Line in Baltimore and the Purple
Line in MC/PGC.  Paid sick leave of course \[see below\], and fighting
the charter school legislation.  Hogan wants to privatize schools like
most Republicans, so he is trying to eliminate some of the rules so
private companies can make a profit off of our children’s education.”

Melissa Broome of [*Working
Matters*](http://jotf.org/AboutJOTF/Blog/tabid/219/tagid/29/Default.aspx)
urges activists to put their voices behind the [***Maryland Healthy
Working Families
Act***](http://jotf.us1.list-manage.com/track/click?u=8a9a456b05ed55c592d1d8c51&id=d90cce2dfc&e=6a334c249d),
the paid sick leave bill mentioned above, which has not been called for
a vote (as of March 26).  “More than 700,000 people in our state are
working every day without access to paid sick days. Please take a quick
moment to contact members of the [***Senate
Finance***](http://jotf.us1.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=8a9a456b05ed55c592d1d8c51&id=036b4f3210&e=6a334c249d) and [***House
Economic
Matters***](http://jotf.us1.list-manage.com/track/click?u=8a9a456b05ed55c592d1d8c51&id=4371773b33&e=6a334c249d) Committees
and ask them to vote in favor of this important legislation.”\
Much of the dispute about the proposed big electric power merger,
[*Exelon’s takeover of
Pepco*](http://dsadc.org/pepco-exelon-deal-provides-focus-to-feb-15-general-meeting/),
is relevant to the major environmental effort in the Maryland
legislature this session, as a bill accelerating the required share of
alternative energy production in the state’s power grid advances with
wide support but the usual business-friendly roadblocks. The “Renewable
Portfolio Standards” bill would increase the percentage of wind, solar
and other renewables required by 2020 to 25 percent and by 2025 to 40
percent. The reset stems from the relative ease with which the state is
on a path to make the goals in the current renewable portfolio
standards. Exelon’s demonstrated unfriendliness to renewables,
especially wind and residential solar (with the “net metering” that
allows rooftop solar) and the megacompany’s need to sell juice from its
aging fleet of nuclear plants is not a good match with Maryland’s goal,
old or new. Activists are working to convince the Public Service
Commissions in both
[*Maryland*](http://dsadc.org/beneficiaries-line-up-to-praise-exelon-pepco-merger-ratepayers-not-so-much/)
and the
[*District*](http://dsadc.org/dc-utility-watchdogs-ratepayers-climate-activists-unite-in-opposing-proposed-pepco-exelon-merger/)
to turn down the merger.

*— Woody Woodruff*

[*Stuart Hall and the Rise of the New Left in Britain: Film and
Discussion at Howard University on April
16*](http://dsadc.org/stuart-hall-and-the-rise-of-the-new-left-in-britain-film-and-discussion-at-howard-university-on-april-16/)

Tuesday, March 31st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2015**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

When filmmaker John Akomfrah decided to make a documentary about the
legendary British intellectual and activist Stuart Hall a few years ago,
it was because he saw Hall as the living embodiment of Britain’s New
Left movement of the 1960s and 70s.  Hall died in 2014 of kidney failure
at age 82, but he worked with Akomfrah to complete that film, *The
Stuart Hall Project*, in his last days.  The result is a brilliant
production composed of footage from the BBC and other productions, still
photographs, and new interviews with Hall and others who were part of
the political and academic dynamics of those raucous years.

*The Stuart Hall Project*, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival
in 2013, will be shown and discussed at DSA’s monthly Salon, 7-9 p.m.,
Thursday, April 16, in Room 118 of the C.B. Powell Building, at Howard
University.  The event is hosted by the Department of Communication,
Culture and Media Studies at Howard.  Carolyn Byerly, a member of DSA,
chairs that department and has arranged to host the monthly Salon
featuring Hall’s work.  She will be joined in leading a discussion after
the film by Howard faculty and students.  \[ALERT:  The film will begin
promptly at 7:05 p.m., so please arrive on time.\]

Stuart Hall, born in Jamaica, was of mixed racial heritage and middle
class.  When he was awarded a Rhodes scholarship to study at Oxford in
1952 to pursue a doctorate in English literature, he expected to be
received as an intellectual equal among his peers.  Instead, he ran head
on into institutionalized racial and class attitudes cultivated by
centuries of British colonialism.  Hall had arrived in Britain with
anti-imperialist views, but the ensuing years would radicalize and move
him Left.

The dark skinned people of the Caribbean Islands were pouring into
Britain in the ‘50s to rebuild the war-torn nation, and while Hall was
part of this so-called “Windrush Generation” (named after the steamship
that gave them passage), in that he, too, was of the Caribbean region,
he was not of the laboring class.  Still, Hall felt alienated from most
of his university classmates who had joined the bebop era and other
trivial pastimes and he began to take greater interest in his own
people.

Hall found himself drawn to the West Indian workers who were
marginalized into segregated, poor areas of London and other cities and
were beginning to develop campaigns to demand their civil rights.  He
also found friendships among a few other disaffected students – an array
of White British, Trinidadian, Jamaican, Syrian, and Sudanese – who were
interested in expanding their radical consciousness.  Hall remembered
that he and his Leftist friends debated “with a fierce intensity” to
move beyond the narrow binaries of the Cold War, i.e., Soviet-style
communism and Western capitalism.  The year 1956 became the year of
“conjunctures” when certain events indicative of the two faces of the
Cold War collided to suggest a new direction for Hall and his friends. 
The first was the Soviet suppression of the popular Hungarian Revolution
with tanks and troops; the second, the British and French invasion of
and efforts to regain the Suez Canal Zone.

In seeking a third political space, Hall and his friends aimed to meld
political analysis to activism.  Hall, who was more affiliated with what
he called “an independent socialist tradition” than “communist
humanism,” would abandon his dissertation on Henry James at Oxford and
assume editorship of what became the *New Left Review*.  Hall was drawn
to Gramsci’s inclinations to “displace Marxism,” and to confront Marx’s
opacities and omissions, as well as to champion Gramsci’s notion of the
“organic intellectual,” i.e., the person whose wisdom is grounded in the
daily lived experience.

In London, Hall supported himself with part time public school teaching
and university lecturing, while he poured his energy into his new
political and intellectual endeavors.  All of the journal’s writers were
also engaging in organizing campaigns around a range of issues including
racial discrimination, disarmament, and anti-imperialism, among others. 
Hall traveled around Britain, sleeping on friends’ sofas and making
friends among others who had already planted the seeds for a Leftist era
– Raymond Williams, Edward and Dorothy Thompson, Richard Hoggart, Doris
Lessing and others.  Hall met Catherine Barrett, a feminist historian,
in a nuclear disarmament campaign, in 1963, and they married a year
later.  Hall experienced racism at a particularly personal level in his
new inter-racial relationship.

The DSA Salon will highlight Hall’s centrality and contributions to the
formation of the New Left in Britain in these years, including his
institutionalization of Leftist analyses during his years as the
director of the Center for Contemporary Cultural Studies at Birmingham
University, 1972-79.  Hall became known as the “father of British
Cultural Studies,” but in fact, he was so much more than that.  Hall
also left his mark on the Open University, from 1979-1997, a
television-based distance learning program, and later as chair of the
International Centre of Visual Arts (Iniva) and other organizations.
