***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from April 2016 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the April 2016 edition of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-april-2016-edition-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Wednesday, April 6th, 2016

 

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the April 2016 issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
free monthly email newsletter of the Metro DC local of Democratic
Socialists of America.**

***SUPPORTING METRO DC DSA… In the national capital, we are engaged
deeply in the Bernie Sanders campaign and in many activities that
support or promote progressive issues and movements, explicitly
socialist or not. In a pre-Star Trek TNG capitalist environment, this
takes money. Join us or support us with a donation at our Paypal link
over there in the right-hand column.***

**THE COMPILER’S OPENING RANT**: The pace and fast-shifting focus of the
presidential primary season has made it hard to take advantage of the
opening for democratic socialism that Bernie Sanders’s campaign has
brought – hard for him, hard for us.

The peripatetic attention of the voters, and the equally kaleidoscopic
methods of the media, have shattered the discourse into many, many
issues and increasingly blurred the connections among them. And that’s
also blurring our unique socialist message – that all these apparently
separate political and social issues are the well-meshed moving parts of
capitalist political economy, a nicely forged set of fetters for workers
well up into the middle class, blending into the tools of domination and
subordination wielded by an (often only half-witting) ruling class. It’s
all connected, we understand – but not in the lens of the day to day
campaign.

It gets worse. Like this writer, many of our readers probably get emails
or snail mail with surveys asking them to rank various issues in order
of importance to them. This is irritating because it helps in the
disaggregation of the issues that emerge from this near-seamless
hegemonic structure, as we prefer to view it.

Core meta-issues of ours like better jobs *in a clean-energy,
sustainable economy*, emancipation from the unfree workplace *that is
fettered by anti-worker regulations*, publicly supported households
*from which children can go to well-run public schools* and so forth do
not fit well into the “rank the issues” framework, of course. It’s
counterproductive to isolate and rank issues when badly done governance,
in a bundle of boss-bought rules, leads to toxic outcomes for
individuals, their families and their communities in a self-reproducing
bundle. But it keeps happening, because it keeps everyone’s eyes off The
Man behind the curtain.

The corollary irritant here is that progressive organizations, our
allies, find it necessary to issue these invitations to rank the
troubles under capitalism, giving the impression that only raising the
minimum wage or only rebuilding the union movement through a better NLRB
will be the magic bullet that makes everything else fall into place for
a post-capitalist existence.

We understand why this is done – because most progressive organizations,
like ours, have to prioritize their very limited resources and focus on
a limited group of issues. So they want to know the ones that will gain
them the most support. We at DSA, we have to admit, do the same,
dutifully prioritizing by choosing one or two issues to front-burner for
the year to come. Our intentions are good, our execution generally
terrible because along come the issues of the moment like bowling balls
to scatter our careful prioritizing. And we round out our carefully
planned year by responding to ***all*** the issues, or at least most of
them.

We wouldn’t be surprised to find that other progressive organizations,
having gathered those survey results, and prioritized what their members
and supporters find most important, find the issues of the real world
busting down the door and shredding their pretty priority list, as
well.\
There’s no question that DSA, like the other organizations, has to match
its capacity to its goals, even as it tries to build capacity through
such providential stimulants as the Sanders campaign. But it distracts
our attention, and that of others, from what is both our glory and our
bane – the recognition that the elements of capitalism are so hard to
dislodge because they all lean on and interlock with one another, and
the grudging understanding that tackling those elements individually
brings only a game of Whack-a-Mole, because the highly adaptable lizard
brain of capitalism will recover and renew its strength and dominance
via some other element while we are working on the one in front of us.
It hampers the message of the Sanders campaign too, contributing to our
possibly unfair cavil that he’s a social democrat. In this media
environment, it’s hard **not** to look like that.

This message problem is not that new, we find. Michael J. Lewis, in a
[*recent book
review*](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/07/books/review/dream-cities-by-wade-graham.html?_r=0),
grumped that most people skip the dialogue-form preamble about the
troubles of English society that opens Thomas More’s *Utopia* (1516) and
move right along to his account of the “perfected” society out there in
Utopia. That’s a mistake, he says,

In the end, More’s real accomplishment was less the far-fetched society
he imagined than his recognition of the seamless unity that links
economics, crime, health and even architecture — and its *corollary that
reforms addressing social problems in isolation were doomed to fail*.
\[italics added\] … Jane Jacobs \[later\] drew the deeper lesson of
“Utopia,” which is that one must approach the organic interconnectedness
of society with humility and deference.

More, of course, has run the spectrum of cred today, from the martyred
hero of religious liberty in Robert Bolt’s 1960s play A *Man for All
Seasons* to his role as a narrow-minded religious bigot, justly snuffed,
in *Wolf Hall*. As Ellen Meiksins Wood (in *Liberty and Property*)
points out, he was a landed-gentry sort who did some enclosing, like his
peers. But Lewis has put a finger on why he continues to be read – even
incompletely. The society More saw every day, in which communal
ownership of the “commons” was being ravaged by big landowners who
enclosed such areas for the burgeoning sheep-and-wool trade, was showing
many of the early markers of capitalist destruction, including desperate
lawlessness and the rural unemployment that would drive folk to huddle,
near-destitute, in the cities and be fodder for the beginnings of
capitalist exploitation throughout the next two centuries.

More, it appears, resisted prioritizing the ills of his society because
of their deep connections – even in advance of capitalism per se. The
problem persists for us, surveys or not. It’s important to keep our
ideal society in our sights – one that retains the lively give-and-take
of getting, making and spending without being grounded on the ooze of
property-based exchange – as we work against the interlocked obstacles
to that ideal community, fighting their tendency to fly apart under our
gaze.

**Bogdan Denitch, DSA Honorary Chair and Co-Founder, Dies** – Author,
activist and educator Bogdan Denitch, who was a co-founder of both
Democratic Socialists of America and its predecessor organization, the
Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee, died on March 28 at the age
of 85.  At the time of his death he was an honorary chair of DSA. 
Denitch, who was of Serbian origin, spent his early years in Yugoslavia
and wrote several books on the breakup of that country and the turmoil
that followed.  He was a longtime socialist activist and a close
associate of the late DSA and DSOC founding chair Michael Harrington. At
press time the national DSA office was working on an obituary; details
of his life and work are available on
[*Wikipedia*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bogdan_Denitch).\
*– Bill Mosley*

**Late Developments in the Maryland General Assembly** – important new
measures on criminal justice reform, paid sick leave and other issues
are still being hammered out as the 2016 legislative session enters its
last two weeks (adjournment on or about the Ides of April). Criminal
justice measures include one that will make a big [***cut in the number
incarcerated***](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/blog/bal-justice-reinvestment-advancing-in-house-20160330-story.html)
(bogged down in squabbling about how much money the state will save by
reducing the number of prisoners, apparently a big selling point with
some in the Assembly). In [***police
accountability***](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/blog/bal-senate-panel-moves-to-put-civilians-on-police-trial-boards-across-the-state-20160330-story.html),
a big package that features civilian members of the trial boards that
assess cops’ abuse of force and racist behavior has survived a House
grinder and is looking medium OK in the Senate. After three years, the
fourth try on getting earned, [***paid sick
leave***](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/blog/bal-paid-sick-leave-bill-gains-key-approval-in-house-20160330-story.html)
for 700,000 uncovered low-income workers – many in food service – has
finally gotten past the House Economic Matters Committee (though quite
roughed up) and will go to the House floor. It still needs to move in
the Senate. A highly progressive bill to expand the scope of the state’s
**Earned Income Tax Credit** got encrusted with tax breaks for the
wealthy on the Senate side and there’s a scuffle in the House over
whether to strip it clean again or not. The state’s new primary schedule
has put amazing pressure on activists who also want to advocate on state
legislation, but the occasional pivot to lobbying one’s own delegates
and senator is encouraged… *— Woody Woodruff*

**Endorsements by METRO DC DSA**\
Metro DC DSA’s Steering Committee has endorsed in three races in
Maryland… the open seats in Congressional District 4 (Prince
George’s/Anne Arundel) and Congressional District 8 (Montgomery). Both
are open because CD 8 Rep. Chris Van Hollen and CD 4 Rep. Donna Edwards
are opponents for the open Senate seat being vacated by Sen. Barbara
Mikulski.\
Metro DC DSA is endorsing
[*Edwards*](https://donnaedwardsforsenate.com/) for the Senate seat,
State Del. [*Joseline Pena-Melnyk*](http://joselinepenamelnyk.com/) for
the CD 4 seat and State Sen. [*Jamie Raskin*](https://jamieraskin.com/)
for the CD 8 seat. None of them are shoo-ins. Pena-Melnyk has received
the *Washington Post*’s endorsement but faces two establishment
candidates. She has, however, received a late-March cascade of
endorsements and money from Emily’s List and similar benefactors. 
Raskin (“too left-wing”) and Edwards (“not enough constituent service”
is the *WaPo* attack line) have had their opponents get the local
daily’s nod and favorable treatment, and been unfavorably treated
themselves by the um, objective *WaPo*. Maryland readers of the
*Washington Socialist* who have not already steeped themselves in these
contentious and entertaining races are urged to do so, and actively
support our endorsees if they have appeal.

***ON THE CALENDAR***\
**Bernie Stuff …Maryland readers note that April 5 is the last day to
register – or to change your party registration if needed to participate
in this unusually interesting Democratic primary.  **[***Early
voting***](http://www.elections.state.md.us/voting/early_voting.html)
**runs from April 14 to April 21 in selected locations.**\
***For advocacy, Marylanders can check MoCo4Bernie’s April events***
[****calendar****](http://moco4bernie.net/events/2016-04/)***, which
gets updated.***

****DSA’s participation in Democracy Spring:\
The D.C. Angle from DD****

Dear friends,

We have a profound opportunity this April. Almost 3,000 people have
signed up to risk arrest and sit-in to save our democracy in what will
be [*the largest civil disobedience action of the
century.*](http://www.dsausa.org/r?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.democracyspring.org%2F&e=26583e95b61392ffa0c41aa2c61579a4&utm_source=dsausa&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=demspring2&n=1)

This Democracy Spring is a mass mobilization backed by over 100
organizations, including the [*Democratic Socialists of
America*](http://www.dsausa.org/?e=26583e95b61392ffa0c41aa2c61579a4&utm_source=dsausa&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=demspring2&n=2),
[*Young Democratic
Socialists*](http://www.ydsusa.org/?e=26583e95b61392ffa0c41aa2c61579a4&utm_source=dsausa&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=demspring2&n=3),
Working Families Party, the AFL-CIO, Avaaz, 99Rise, United Students
Against Sweatshops and the United States Student Association. Millions
of members from across the movement are coming together for a
breakthrough moment for our country — the time we take back our
democracy.

[****Take the Pledge: Let Democracy Spring Know You’ll Be
There****](http://www.dsausa.org/r?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.democracyspring.org%2F%3Frecruiter_id%3D51215&e=26583e95b61392ffa0c41aa2c61579a4&utm_source=dsausa&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=demspring2&n=4)\
**Democracy Spring launches on April 2nd** with a 10-day, 140-mile march
from Philadelphia to Washington, D.C. Marchers will meet with their
fellow citizens, talk to the media, and create a firestorm of
anticipation by laying out a simple choice to Congress: either pass
bills to make the 2016 elections free and fair for for all people, or
send thousands of Americans to jail simply for demanding an equal
voice.\
To make this march a success, Democracy Spring needs your support. There
are already 100+ marchers pledged to participate in the full march, and
hundreds more joining somewhere along the route. While the support
provided to marchers will be nothing fancy, basic needs must be covered.
Here’s what we need:

-   Are you a member of place of worship along the march route that’d be
    willing to host marchers? Are you willing to open your home for a
    few folks?

-   Marchers need energy. And our energy comes from food. Donate
    non-perishables or volunteer to lead meal prep at a march stop!

-   *\[And see the April 9 Greenbelt event for Democracy Spring below\]*

If you are able and excited to support Democracy Spring, please contact
the Logistics Coordinator at
[*democracyspringlogistics@gmail.com*](mailto:democracyspringlogistics@gmail.com).
**If you want to meet up with DSA members in Washington, DC, too,
contact** [***info@dsausa.org***](mailto:info@dsausa.org) **and/or fill
out** [***this
form***](http://www.dsausa.org/r?u=https%3A%2F%2Fdocs.google.com%2Fforms%2Fd%2F19rZxB3vZIs1e7YrLsUfEhEKtjEeSQojkMoiiMacqEnM%2Fviewform&e=26583e95b61392ffa0c41aa2c61579a4&utm_source=dsausa&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=demspring2&n=5)**.**\
Lastly, the most simple way for you to support the marchers is through a
donation. Any funds donated towards the march will be used to purchase
food, medical supplies, and equipment for our rallies. [*Donate now to
support the 100+ people who will march from Philadelphia to Washington,
D.C. to take back our
democracy.*](http://www.dsausa.org/r?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.democracyspring.org%2Fdonate&e=26583e95b61392ffa0c41aa2c61579a4&utm_source=dsausa&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=demspring2&n=6)

When marchers arrive at the Capitol on April 11th, they’ll be joined by
thousands of their fellow citizens to sit-in in for at least a week in a
disciplined, dignified, and massive nonviolent protest that will shake
the foundations of the corrupt status quo. Opportunities like this don’t
come around often. With the American public and the national media
focusing on the elections, the issue of our broken political system is
being raised up like never before.

Democracy Spring will be the spark that lights the conscience of our
country on fire. Our chance is here. We just need to reach out and seize
it – join us.

Together, we are poised to make history.

See you in Washington,\
David Duhalde, DSA Deputy Director\
[*http://www.dsausa.org/*](http://www.dsausa.org/?e=26583e95b61392ffa0c41aa2c61579a4&utm_source=dsausa&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=demspring2&n=7)

***Other, mostly Maryland events***\
**Thursday, April 7:  Progressive Cheverly Forum:  Prince George’s
County Housing:  Equity or Inequity.  Speakers to be announced.** 7:00 –
9:00 p.m.\
Judith P. Hoyer Early Childhood Center Cafeteria, 2300 Belleview Ave.
(Belleview and Tuxedo).  Light refreshments served.

**Saturday, April 9** **Greenbelt Rally for Election Reform *via
Democracy Spring***, 7 to 9 PM Greenbelt Community Center Room 114.
*Democracy Spring* aims to end big money in politics and to ensure free
and fair elections where every American has an equal voice. It will
stage a march beginning April 2 at the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia and
ending April 10 in Washington. *Welcome some of the Democracy Spring
marchers as they arrive in our area.* For further information about the
walk and events culminating in Washington, DC consult:
[*http://www.democracyspring.org/demawakening*](http://www.democracyspring.org/demawakening)

**Saturday, April 9 – Maryland United for Peace and Justice hosts a**
**free SKILLS WORKSHOP for your organization to learn how to increase
members, volunteers and how to attract other resources.** Adelphi
Friends Meeting, 2303 Metzerott Road, Adelphi, Maryland  20783, from 2-5
p.m. “**The 5 E’s of Attracting Resources to Your Cause**,” led by Mark
C. Titi , who is a [*consultant to small nonprofit
organizations*](http://www.wobblynonprofit.org/).

**In This Issue:**\
Joslyn Williams, for decades the progressive face of DC labor, is
stepping down as the DC Central Labor Council’s leader. Kurt Stand
outlines Williams’s storied career and role in turning DC labor in
progressive directions from a less-promising start.[ *Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/carrying-a-legacy-forward-joslyn-williams-and-the-metro-dc-labor-movement/)

The stunning reversal that saw the DC Public Service Commission buy into
the  Exelon purchase of local electric utility Pepco has more than one
root cause, Andy Feeney finds. What tipped the balance? [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/a-corporate-tammany-hall-on-the-potomac-the-scandal-of-the-exelon-deal-and-how-pepcos-influence-peddling-made-it-possible/)

Our Metrorail system has gone from being the national model for clean
and great-looking public transit in the ’80s to a near-laughingstock
today, with deferred maintenance problems bringing national attention.
Bill Mosley traces the persistent lack of accountability and
responsibility on the part of the jurisdictions – and socioeconomic
classes – that benefit most from the system. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/metro-shutdown-shows-need-for-investment-in-the-system/)

Will the Sanders campaign create a stronger and enduring socialist left
presence in US politics, recovering from the Cold War stigma? Harold
Meyerson, at a DSA event focusing on that, made a convincing case that
it’s already under way. Woody Woodruff reports. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/building-a-permanent-strong-left-parallel-to-sanders-campaign-harold-meyerson-leads-a-conversation/)

How many Republican presidential candidates does it take to completely
ignore D.C. statehood and rights of representation? There was only one
holdout – Donald Trump – and his final place in the pantheon of
last-colony enthusiasts gets settled in Bill Mosley’s brief account.
[*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/trump-on-dc-democracy-no-to-statehood-maybe-to-representation/)

The complicated intersection of public access to (and support of)
reproductive health services, cultural changes needed for both women and
men to temper lingering patriarchy, and activism were traced in a
Socialist Salon on reproductive justice, Kurt Stand relates. [*Read
complete article
 *](http://dsadc.org/abortion-rights-and-reproductive-justice-continuing-the-discussion/)

President Obama’s nomination for the Supreme Court seat vacated by
Antonin Scalia’s death appears designed to be difficult for Senate
Republicans to ignore. Bill Mosley argues that Merrick Garland is,
instead, “the wrong nominee for the times.” [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/obama-supreme-court-nomination-a-missed-opportunity/)

In a look at a classic history of the 20^th^ Century, Andy Feeney traces
the career and influence of Eric Hobsbawm, whose *The Age of Extremes*
continues to be a (mostly) useful guide to the puzzles of the Soviet
Union’s role in that “short” century. [*Read complete
article*](http://dsadc.org/a-great-marxist-historian-surveys-the-rise-collapse-of-communism/)

Good Reads for Socialists has plenty of surprises – the US six-party
system, underwater Shakespeare, Trump’s appeal on trade and much more.
[*Read complete article*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-6/)

[*A Corporate Tammany Hall on the Potomac: The Scandal of the Exelon
Deal, and How PEPCO’s Influence Peddling Made It
Possible*](http://dsadc.org/a-corporate-tammany-hall-on-the-potomac-the-scandal-of-the-exelon-deal-and-how-pepcos-influence-peddling-made-it-possible/)

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

*By Andy Feeney*

On March 23, the DC Public Service Commission betrayed the DC public
interest.  By a 2-1 vote, with PSC chair Betty Ann Kane dissenting, the
commission at last approved the enormously controversial offer by the
Chicago-based nuclear utility giant Exelon to buy control over our local
electricity utility PEPCO.

As the *Washington Socialist* reported last year, local consumer
advocates and renewable energy activists have been warning the PSC and
the media for two years or more that this merger will harm the average
PEPCO ratepayer in a host of interesting ways while likely frustrating
the DC Government’s alleged interest in promoting solar rooftop and
windmill-generated electricity in the District, thus setting back the
city’s efforts to develop a more sustainable energy base.

This makes the PSC’s ruling difficult to explain, especially since the
Commission had issued a unanimous rejection of a previous Exelon offer
only last August.  Moreover, DC’s Mayor Muriel Bowser, who also had
opposed the original Exelon offer, only to reverse course later in the
fall when Exelon and PEPCO submitted an alternative plan that included
some \$78 million in rather short-term benefits for residential
ratepayers, by March 23 had changed course once again.  By the time the
Commission finally announced its approval of Exelon’s third and latest
offer, the Bowser administration was urging its rejection.

Despite its own initial ruling of last August, despite its rejection of
Exelon’s second takeover proposal early this year, and despite the
renewed opposition of the Mayor, the DC Office of People’s Counsel and
the DC Attorney General’s Office, the PSC on March 23 surprised many
local observers and chose to accept one of Exelon’s three newest
takeover options.

As a result, attorneys for Exelon and PEPCO have already merged the
management structures of the two companies, and most observers think the
long-delayed takeover is now an accomplished fact.  True: at press time,
a local renewable energy activist group called Grid 2.0 had submitted a
new objection to the takeover, but most critics think it will become
final by the end of May.

Why did the PSC finally change its mind?  Given its unanimous rejection
of the original Exelon offer and its 2-1 rejection of the second offer
submitted last fall, why did the Commission reverse itself last week,
and accept a very similar plan to the original one, especially when even
the Mayor had come out against it?

Local utility industry watcher and environmental analyst Marchant
Wentworth, in an interview with the *Socialist* just before press time,
said the shifting stance of the Apartment and Office Building
Association of Greater Washington (AOBA) was one operative factor in the
PSC’s flip-flop.

For some years now, Wentworth noted, apartment building owners and
certain other local businesses, who have a low elasticity of demand for
electricity, have been required to pay higher electricity prices in
order to provide somewhat lower prices for residential customers.  The
commercial building owners natural resented this subsidy to residential
ratepayers, and they were not pleased when Exelon, in order to sweeten
its original merger proposal, agreed to make \$78 million available to
the Mayor’s Office for redistribution to such ratepayers to buffer them
against the next few years of rate increases, while providing little or
no such protection to the apartment industry.

However, when the PSC rejected the second Exelon proposal with the \$78
million sweetener, and when Exelon responded by then submitting a list
of three possible alternatives to it, one of the three new options
called for the PSC rather than the Mayor’s Office to control the \$78
million buffer fund.  This opens the possibility that the commercial
owners may see some of the subsidy money, instead of all it going to
residential power users.  Given an AOBA press release from last fall, it
also appears that the PSC may now considering changing its rate
structures over a series of rate cases unfolding in time, to provide
relief to commercial building owners – at the likely expense of other
customers, it appears.

The apartment building owners therefore reversed their opposition to the
deal and declared in favor of the option that the PSC ultimately
approved.  Of course the PSC, too, had reason to like the idea of
getting to hold the \$78 million instead of the Mayor controlling it. 
On the other hand, the Mayor’s Office lost a bit of turf under the deal,
and this may be why Mayor Bowser, the Office of People’s Counsel and
Attorney General Karl Racine all opposed what the Commission ended up
accepting.

Yet the biggest winners from the apparently completed merger, Wentworth
said, are PEPCO’s shareholders, who collectively will gain “billions of
dollars” from Exelon buying up their PEPCO stock at a premium price well
above its market value. PEPCO shareholders and executives thus have the
greatest interest in what the PSC approved, and that’s why PEPCO’s
wide-ranging web of political influence in the District is likely a key
important factor in the outcome.

As local and national media have noted, PEPCO in recent years has
donated some \$1.6 million annually in contributions to a wide range of
local charities and civic organizations.  Through its hiring practices
and apprenticeship programs, the company also can offer attractive
career opportunities to an admittedly rather limited circle of minority
youth in need of such opportunities.  PEPCO also has been relatively
progressive in racial matters over the past several decades, hiring and
promoting black executives to relatively high positions.

Accordingly, when Exelon and PEPCO first proposed to merge a few years
ago, PEPCO, its shareholders and its executives already had established
a formidable web of local political contacts who would support the
proposed deal, regardless of what common sense and hundreds of pages of
expert testimony might say against it.

For example, as the trade publication *RTO Insider* reported back in
October, and as the *Post* has reported as well, a former senior vice
president and special advisor to the CEO of PEPCO Holdings, Inc., (PHI),
Beverly Perry, has recently served as a senior adviser to Mayor Bowser. 
For his part, DC Attorney General Karl Racine is a lawyer who in his
former corporate practice did work for PEPCO, and Phil Mendelsohn, the
generally respected chair of the DC Council, owns enough PEPCO stock
that he has been officially required to report it.  DC Council member
Vincent Orange is a former regional vice president of PHI.

Within the local corporate and nonprofit world, meanwhile, the CEO of
PEPCO Energy Services, John Huffman, as of last fall sat of the board of
the Capital Area Food Bank; a retired PEPCO executive, Linda Jo Smith,
is listed as board chair of the DC anti-hunger group So Others Might
Eat, or SOME.

A little web research indicates that yet another PEPCO vice president,
Marc Battle, sits on the board of the local art and music group Step
Afrika!  David Velasquez, former executive vice president of PHI and now
the head of PEPCO operations under Exelon, appears to be serving on the
boards of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Zoo, the Greater
Washington Board of Trade and the Trust for the National Mall, among
other entities.

The retiring CEO of PHI, Joseph Rigby, who is stepping down following
the merger, has until recently been a board member of the Federal City
Council, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the Greater Washington Board of
Trade and the Greater Washington Sports Alliance.  And according to
PEPCO’s own web site, the company in 2013 was “partners” with, and
evidently a contributor to, dozens of DC, Maryland and national
nonprofit groups, including:

-   The Children’s Defense Fund

-   The Congressional Black Caucus

-   The Cystic Fibrosis Association

-   The D.C. Boys Choir

-   C. Central Kitchen

-   The D.C. Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy

-   Emmaus Council for the Aging

-   The Jewish Council for the Aging

-   The Latin American Youth Center

-   The Glover Park Citizens Association

-   The Greater Washington Hispanic Chamber of Commerce

-   Holy Cross Hospital Foundation

-   The House of Ruth, a D.C. shelter for battered women and children
    escaping from domestic violence

-   Mission of Love Charities, Inc.

-   The National NAACP and the NAACP of Montgomery County

-   The Spina Bifida Association

-   Teach for America – DC Region

-   Society for Ecological Restoration

-   Special Olympics – District of Columbia

-   The Nature Conservancy – Maryland/DC

-   Washington Nationals Youth Baseball

-   Studio Theater

-   The Phillips Collection

-   University of the District of Columbia

-   George Washington University

The anti-hunger and anti-homelessness organization Thrive DC,\
and numerous other local and national organizations.

When Exelon and PEPCO brought their case for the takeover before the
PSC, the Mayor’s Office and the local print and broadcast media,
therefore, they had the backing of many local business groups that get
financial benefits from doing business with PEPCO, as well as the Board
of Trade and the Federal City Council, now headed by former DC Mayor
Anthony Williams.  They also boasted of having the endorsement of nearly
four dozen nonprofit groups, whose representatives in some cases
testified before the PSC that the proposed merger was clearly in the
public interest – even though the ratepayers of Baltimore, where Exelon
recently took control of the former local utility Baltimore Gas &
Electric, have endured five rate hikes in two years since that merger
was consummated.

No one can say for sure just how much sway PEPCO’s “partners” – or more
properly speaking, its charitable clients – had in persuading two of the
PSC’s initially skeptical commissioners to change their minds on the
merger. But it’s a fairly safe bet that the clamor from PEPCO-beholden
nonprofits, along with pressure from the Board of Trade and the
Apartment Building Owners Association, didn’t do any damage to PEPCO’s
cause.

Obviously, the use of money to buy political influence has become all
too common in our society, but there’s one aspect of PEPCO’s political
strategy in the takeover proceedings that seems unusually outrageous,
even by ordinary American standards.

PEPCO – to the extent it still exists as an organization – is a
regulated utility because it’s a natural monopoly, and therefore enjoys
a special status under law.  It controls all or virtually all
distribution of electricity in the District and other parts of its
service area, encompassing an estimated 2 million customers here and in
certain parts of Maryland, Delaware and New Jersey, because of the
physical absurdity of having rival power companies attempt to string
competing networks of power line wires and electrical transformers over
the area.

As a legally tolerated and regulated monopoly, PEPCO can essentially
force almost everyone in its service area to pay for its electricity
distribution, whether we choose to or not.  And by using a small
fraction of the enormous revenues it receives from us to buy influence
with dozens, if not hundreds of local businesses and charitable and
civic organizations, PEPCO has devised a way to use a fraction of the
money we pay to it to thwart the voices of genuine consumer advocates
before the PSC, not to mention in the commercial media.  Most
outrageously, PEPCO seems to be using its contributions to perpetually
underfunded and needy anti-hunger and anti-poverty organizations and
churches in order to get them to support a bad merger that’s likely to
impose additional economic burdens on their clients.

From one angle, PEPCO’s use of its remarkable influence web illustrates
what Marxist economics says about the effects of “alienation” in the
capitalist workplace and marketplace, where corporations can earn
profits by overcharging their customers and exploiting their workers,
then employ those profits to build larger economic and political
structures to make these customers and workers even more powerless than
we found ourselves originally.

In terms of mainstream American political thinking, though, it’s
probably better to reflect on the ways that PEPCO’s influence buying in
today’s Washington resembles the mechanisms that big city political
machines like New York City’s notorious Tammany Hall used to profit from
their political influence during the Gilded Age of the late nineteenth
century.  Under the rule of Tammany Hall in particular, and under the
dominion of many similar urban political machines of its era, relatively
poor and powerless city residents – in the case of Tammany’s New York,
poor Irish immigrants only recently arrived from the Old Country – could
obtain very real and important short-term benefits from machine rule.

If a poor Irish family in New York was too broke to afford a decent
Christmas dinner, say, or if a son or nephew in the family was jobless
and needed paid work with the police force or the city water department
or some other city agency, they could often call on the local Tammany
precinct worker or “ward heeler” for aid.  The precinct worker by
working through the machine might then provide the needed Christmas
dinner, or arrange for the necessary job with the city, or contribute to
the family’s welfare in some other important fashion – but at a price.

The price was the promise of the recipients of Tammany largesse to
support the machine’s favored candidates in the next election.  And by
using its influence with the poor and powerless to elect reliably
corrupt politicians to office, the Tammany machine could ensure that
various corrupt contracts and other deals would end up generating
revenues for the organization – at the cost, of course, of the taxpayers
and the general public.  So long as you supported the machine, you
probably could count on being able to afford a goose for Christmas
dinner, but at the cost of having a corrupt police force, paying higher
taxes to pay for streets and buildings that cost more than necessary, or
that fell apart quickly after being constructed, or paying higher prices
for streetcar service than you should have.

The analogy obviously isn’t perfect, but it looks as if PEPCO, through
its employment policies, its connections to the boards of locally
important business and charitable organizations, and its seemingly
generous contributions to local organizations that are genuinely doing
good work, and genuinely need the money – organizations like the House
of Ruth, or SOME, or the Cystic Fibrosis Organization or the NAACP, even
– is doing what it can to build its own corporate equivalent of Tammany
Hall here in the District.

Clearly recipient organizations like the House of Ruth and Greater
Washington United Way really do need the money; the same is no doubt
true for the Nature Conservancy and Emmaus Council on Aging.  But the
price of PEPCO’s supposed generosity to these groups is that DC
ratepayers and consumer advocates have apparently lost what little
influence we might once have had over the decisions of the PSC, and that
we’re likely to be confronted soon with sharply rising electricity
prices because of it.  Worse yet, PEPCO’s regionally based patronage
machine will now be supplanted by the larger, multi-state patronage
machine of Exelon, which should prove even harder for the PSC to
regulate than PEPCO has been.

Back in 1903, muckraking journalist Lincoln Steffens labeled this sort
of corrupt machine politics *The Shame of the Cities.*  In 2016, it
looks as if Steffens was right.

[*A Great Marxist Historian Surveys The Rise & Collapse of
Communism*](http://dsadc.org/a-great-marxist-historian-surveys-the-rise-collapse-of-communism/)

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

*By Andy Feeney*

**Book Review** of Eric Hobsbawm, *The Age of Extremes:  A History of
the World, 1914-1991,* Pantheon Press/Random House (New York: 1994), 585
pages (627 pages including references and index).

For socialists of all varieties, the nature and ultimate fate of the
1917 Russian Revolution are topics that appear to be inescapable.  Even
today, 25 years following the collapse of the Soviet Union, democratic
socialists are still likely to confront conservative [*critics who
claim*](http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/03/reminder-liberalism-is-working-marxism-failed.html)
that “socialism” at heart is no different from Russian-style Communism,
which was almost complete evil from the conservative perspective.  To
the left of DSA, meanwhile, we’re still likely to encounter
campus-trained Marxists, some with doctorate degrees, who claim to see
the Bolshevik Revolution – properly interpreted, of course – as a
template for what all “real” socialists should be doing in the
twenty-first century.

For democratic socialists who haven’t immersed themselves in this
history of Soviet-inspired Communism and what became of it, and who thus
find themselves caught in the debates between the right and the left
with no clear position on Bolshevik-style Communism, *The Age of
Extremes,* by the late British Marxist Eric Hobsbawm, offers a sweeping
account of Communist history that’s well worth reading.

It’s an old book, admittedly, published just three years after the
Soviet Union dissolved, leading much of the global Communist movement to
dissolve along with it.  By today’s political standards, there are some
obvious gaps in Hobsbawm’s analysis, which says much too little about
feminism, the politics of race or the problems of gender, and gets some
of what it does say wrong.

But Hobsbawm during his lifetime was one of the world’s leading Marxist
historians, and his often provocative yet balanced account of what
international Communism meant in its day is enormously impressive, and
has been portrayed as such even by certain conservative reviewers. I
think this book therefore is one that could be valuable for many younger
DSA members, as well as for older socialists who know they like
Hobsbawm, but haven’t yet gotten around to reading this volume.

From the perspective of many Americans, Hobsbawm (1917-2012) may seem a
paradoxical figure.  For much of the late twentieth century, Hobsbawm
enjoyed a reputation as a leading British historian.  He was accepted as
a fellow of the British Academy in 1978; in 1998 he was appointed to the
exclusive “Order of the Companions of Honor” for the Commonwealth
countries (where his fellow members included several lords of the realm,
Dame Judi Dench and the Queen).  From 2002 through 2012 he served as
president of Birbeck College at the University of London, and in 2002
the generally rightwing British journal *Spectator* hailed him as
“arguably our greatest living historian – not only Britain’s, but the
world’s.”

Yet for most of his life, from his decision to join the Communist Party
of Great Britain in 1936 through his leaving it in 1991, shortly before
the CPGB dissolved, Hobsbawm was a loyal Communist, albeit a scholarly
one.  As a Jewish teenager who had been born in Egypt, but who resided
in Berlin in 1931, Hobsbawm was first attracted to a Communist Party
youth group at the age of 14 and went on to join the British Communist
Party at the age of 19, in 1936.  His loyalty to Communism, which
originally attracted him as an alternative to fascism, apparently never
wavered afterwards.

He remained in the Party despite the Hitler-Stalin Pact of 1939, Nikita
Khrushchev’s famous denunciations of Stalin at the 20^th^ Party Congress
in 1955, the Soviet crushing of the Hungarian Revolution in 1956, and
the 1968 Russian invasion that ended the “Prague Spring” of Communist
reformer Alexander Dubcek in Czechoslovakia.

Hobsbawm’s open membership in the Communist Party over the course of his
career, and his contributions to the Party’s journal *Marxism Today,*
did not destroy his reputation in the UK, as they might have in the US
in the 1950s.  They did attract some criticism, naturally.

When Hobsbawm published *The Age of Extremes* in 1994, following the
collapse of Soviet Communism in 1991, the financial historian Niall
Ferguson, writing in the UK’s generally conservative *Sunday Telegraph,*
hailed him as the only living historian “of whatever political
affiliation” with the knowledge and talent to complete such a sweeping
history*.* Kenneth Prewitt of the Rockefeller Foundation wrote that
“Hobsbawm’s magisterial treatment of the short twentieth century will be
the definitive *fin-de-siecle* work.”  On the other hand, a number of
vocal anti-Communist writers, including historian Robert Conquest and
the Polish ex-Communist Leszek Kolakowski, publicly attacked *Age of
Extremes* for allegedly soft-pedalling the crimes of such Bolshevik
leaders as Lenin and Stalin.

For some readers today, it may seem from the tone of Hobsbawm’s rather
non-judgmental prose that the anti-Communist critics of 1994 had a
point.  *Age of Extremes* contains few lengthy passages expressing moral
outrage over Stalin’s crimes – or for that matter, Hitler’s
authorization of the Holocaust.  There are few if any anguished
descriptions of what European capitalism meant for European working
people during the 1930s Depression, either, or what British imperialism
meant for India and South Africa.  Nor does Hobsbawm devote more than a
few paragraphs to the violent Chinese convulsions that resulted from
Mao’s Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in the 1960s.

What Hobsbawm does in *Age of Extremes,* however, is offer an
essentially Marxist critique, albeit at a high level of abstraction, of
what he saw as the inevitable shortcomings of Russian Bolshevism
following the October Revolution of 1917.  He also concludes his work
with an essentially Marxist repudiation of Soviet-style Communism – “the
original ideal of a single, centrally controlled and state-planned
economy based on a completely collectivized state” — as a workable model
for future socialists.

The Soviet system that Lenin and the Bolsheviks established after the
revolution of 1917, Hobsbawm writes,

“was designed not as a global alternative to capitalism, but as a
specific set of responses to the particular situation of a vast and
spectacularly backward country at a particular and unrepeatable
historical conjuncture.  The failure of revolution elsewhere \[which
Lenin and other Bolsheviks hoped would occur in response to the
Bolshevik seizure of power\] left the USSR committed to build socialism
alone, in a country in which, by the universal consensus of Marxists in
1917, including the Russian ones, the conditions for doing so were
simply not present.”

The attempt to make the Bolshevik version of socialism succeed in the
old Russian empire, Hobsbawm  acknowledges, produced “remarkable
achievements – not least the ability to defeat Germany in the Second
World War,” particularly considering that Tsarist Russia had been unable
to defeat the Germans in World War I.   The fact that Stalin’s USSR,
despite its history of drastic political purges and mass starvation
among the peasantry, managed to beat Hitler’s armies in the 1940s while
the Tsar’s Russian empire had been unable to beat the Kaiser’s military
forces before 1917 showed that Communist Party rule had produced real
benefits.

But in Hobsbawm’s view, Russian Communism’s achievements came “at quite
enormous and intolerable human cost.” and “at the cost of what proved
eventually to be a dead-end economy and a political system for which
there was nothing to be said.”  The “really existing socialism” of
Eastern European societies under Soviet oversight during the Cold War
operated under “the same disadvantages, although to a lesser extent,” as
that of the USSR, Hobsbawm observes*. * The book therefore concludes
that “a revival or rebirth of this pattern of socialism is neither
possible, desirable, nor – even assuming conditions were to favour it –
necessary” – a remarkable statement, given Hobsbawm’s own political
history.

Most democratic socialists have long agreed the Soviet-style Communism
offers no socialist answers for the future. But for those of us with
only a limited familiarity with Communist history, it is worth reading
through this long and multifaceted book, although selectively, to
understand how Hobsbawm’s Marxist analysis differs from that of the
anti-Communist conservatives.

In a nutshell, Hobsbawm agrees with Marxist scholars who have written
that Tsarist Russia, in 1917, was ripe for revolution and yet
drastically unsuited for the development of socialism according to
Marx’s theories about the historical stages of economic development. 
Russia in 1917 was largely a peasant society, with a small although
politically active industrial proletariat.  As a multi-ethnic empire it
was proverbial for cultural backwardness and superstition, with a low
literacy rate and a largely feudal government.  Marx and Engels had
originally predicted socialist revolution only in much more economically
advanced capitalist societies.

As Hobsbawm notes, then, virtually all Marxists before 1917 agreed that
it would be impossible to build socialism in Russia – unless, that is,
the Russian Revolution quickly inspired successful socialist revolutions
in more advanced European societies, such as Germany, that had been
enduring enormous suffering thanks to the First World War.

Gambling on the likelihood of their example inspiring socialist
revolutions in war-torn European countries, the Bolsheviks seized power
almost bloodlessly in October of 1917 and, after first trying to govern
in alliance with anarchists in the left wing of the Socialist
Revolutionary Party, soon found themselves forced to govern as a single
party during an extremely brutal civil war.  At the end of the civil war
in 1920 they found themselves in control of a huge, still backward land
in which the revolutionary wing of the working class had largely been
killed off and an already limited industrial economy had been
devastated.

For a few optimistic years it looked as if the European socialist
revolutions the Bolsheviks had hoped for would occur, but by the early
1920s all these revolutions had failed, leaving the surviving Bolsheviks
with the challenge of trying to build socialism – or at least a decent
society – in a situation where Marxist theory said success was almost
impossible.

By 1921 Lenin himself realized that the Bolsheviks represented almost no
one but themselves, Hobsbawm writes, and to rebuild the economy they
adopted a New Economic Policy (NEP) that essentially allowed the
reemergence of small-scale capitalism, which peasants who had seized the
estates of Tsarist nobles in 1917 took to enthusiastically.  But the
chances of building socialism on a basis of peasant capitalism were
slim; there were potential conflicts looming between the agricultural
peasant economy and the urban industrial workers, and eventually,
following Lenin’s death and Stalin’s rise to power, the Communist-led
government chose to push ahead for rapid industrial growth and the
collectivization of agriculture.

Under even enlightened leadership this course of action would have meant
forcing the vast majority of the peasants, and many industrial workers,
too, to make immediate sacrifices in living standards that most Russians
disliked, Hobsbawm indicates:  “Any policy of rapid modernization in the
USSR, under the circumstances of the time, was bound to be ruthless and,
because imposed against the bulk of the people and imposing serious
sacrifices on them, to some extent coercive.”

Even without Stalin, too, the increasingly hierarchical structure the
Communist Party had developed during and after the civil war meant that
there was a risk of Communist rule in the USSR developing into
dictatorship.  Stalin, however, exercised a unique degree of “ferocity,
ruthlessness and lack of scruple” in consolidating his rule, Hobsbawm
reports.

Partly because he lacked the charisma and self-confidence that Hitler
could deploy to inspire members of the Nazi Party in Germany, “Stalin
ruled his party, as everything else within reach of his personal power,
by terror and fear.”  Among other things, he purged the Party itself and
the officials of the government of several million people between 1934
and 1939, and he had upwards of 400,000 of them executed.  His authority
as an autocrat, therefore, came to be nearly absolute.  Meanwhile,
Stalin’s economic policy of rapid industrial growth did enjoy some
positive results, although at great social cost.  The collectivization
imposed on the peasants, however, was a disaster and caused a major
famine in 1932-33.

“It will probably never be possible to calculate the human cost of
Russia’s iron decades adequately,” Hobsbawm writes of the Stalin years,
but “the number of direct and indirect victims must be measured in eight
rather than seven digits.” Whether the total number was closer to 10
million or 20 million victims, it was “shameful and beyond palliation,
let alone justification.”

Yet largely because it suffered from a virtual economic blockade imposed
by the West, Stalin’s USSR continued growing economically in the 1930s
even as the leading capitalist countries were wracked by depression,
giving a real cachet to Communism in the Stalinist mode.  Then during
World War II, following Hitler’s unbelievably ill-judged invasion of the
USSR, the stubborn resistance of the Russian people to German sieges and
military occupation broke the Nazi advance, and was soon followed by the
Red Army pushing the Germans back to Berlin – a military feat crucial to
winning the war, and one that added to the international allure of
Communism.

The result, Hobsbawm argues, was that an improvised Communist economy
cobbled together to bring about industrialism in less-developed
societies that were unready for socialism ironically became the model
for revolutionary socialists nearly everywhere.  A Communist Party that
had developed dictatorial or at least authoritarian features quite out
of keeping with what most Marxist socialists had envisioned before 1917
became the backbone of a global revolutionary force of remarkable
discipline and tenacity, while also inspiring the formation of similar
elite-led, authoritarian parties in many Third World societies
undergoing anti-colonialist revolutions.

And yet by the late 1980s in Eastern Europe and in the USSR itself,
socialist central economic planning as the USSR had first developed it
found itself unable to compete effectively against the capitalist West,
in part because Communist Eastern Europe and the USSR itself were now
far more economically integrated with the West than Russia had been in
the 1930s.  The Russian people in the 1980s actually were living more
comfortably than they had been in decades, Hobsbawm writes, but their
economy was vulnerable to the global economic recession then plaguing
the Western liberal democracies, and it was clear to Soviet leaders that
their economy was in trouble, partly because it was less efficient in
adopting new capitalist technologies.

Meanwhile vanguardist Communist parties based on Leninist principles,
but increasingly staffed by careerists with selfish motives, were
failing to inspire most working people in the Communist world with any
real zeal for either socialism or Marxism.  This was partly because the
Communist Party itself was committed in theory to being a revolutionary
elite, standing above the mass of people rather than reflecting their
ideas and desires.  And when a Communist Party boss with a genuine
interest in returning to a more democratic and egalitarian form of
socialism, Mikhail Gorbachev, attempted to reform “actually existing
socialism,” all he succeeded in doing was destroying it.

This is a gross over-simplification of what Hobsbawm writes in *The Ag*e
*of Extremes,* which also surveys how the international Communist
movement influenced revolutions and reform movements in a number of
other societies, notably including China, Southeast Asia, Cuba and Latin
America.  But this is the essence of what Hobsbawm thinks went wrong
with Communism.  Besides outlining the history of Soviet Communism
itself, however, Hobsbawm with considerable literary skill, and an
almost novelistic talent for words at times, also uses this work to
outline a variety of intellectual connections between Soviet-style
Communism and other important developments in what he calls the Short
Twentieth Century.

Politically and economically, these developments include the two world
wars of the 1917-1945 period, the deep depression of the 1930s and the
fascist and Nazi movements that emerged from it, the unusual cooperation
between Soviet Russia and the western capitalist powers that defeated
fascism in World War II, the global Cold War that resumed between the
Communist bloc and Western capitalism from the end of the war through
1991, and the era of anticolonial, generally anti-European revolutions
that already were underway in the 1920s and that continued until nearly
1980.

Hobsbawm also explores the capitalist “Golden Age” of 1945-1970 and how
both the lessons of the Depression years and the challenge of
Communist-inspired revolutions during the Cold War affected it, partly
by inspiring capitalist governments to adopt social safety nets of
various kinds as a political safeguard against domestic radicalism.

*The Age of Extremes* likewise examines the emergence of “modernist”
avant-garde developments in art, music and literature before 1914, and
their further development through the 1930s; the era of “postmodernist”
art and literature after 1970 that led to the repudiation of modernist
thinking in several artistic fields and European philosophy; and (to a
limited degree) the new feminist movement that emerged in western
capitalist societies after 1960.  This accompanied a general cultural
revolution in prosperous capitalist societies in the 1960s that Hobsbawm
– rightly or wrongly – essentially identifies as individualistic, and
either anti-social or at least asocial.

On the other hand, Hobsbawm in this book seems shockingly indifferent
to, and ignorant of, developments in black political activism and
thought in the capitalist West and the USA since the 1950s.  Thus his
index contains no entries for W.E.B. Dubois, who had famously argued
that “the problem of the Twentieth Century will be the problem of the
color line,” nor for Malcolm X, nor for Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., nor
for the Pan-Africanist Marxist writer C.L.R. James, nor for Franz Fanon.

Showing a similar set of intellectual and political limitations,
Hobsbawm’s text labels gay cultural pioneers as “homosexual” and spends
virtually no time discussing them, much less the gay political activism
that followed the 1969 Stonewall riot in the United States or the
radical activism of Act Up protesters addressing the AIDS crisis in the
1980s.  In these ways he appears oblivious to the socialist politics of
intersectionality, although he must have had at least some exposure to
the ideas of Stuart Hall, a British contemporary of Hobsbawm’s and a
cofounder of *New Left Review*, concerning the intersection of race,
class and gender in leftwing British politics.

One of Hobsbawm’s strengths in *Age of Extremes,* on the other hand, is
his section on revolutions in science that contributed to sweeping
changes in capitalist societies, and that through technological change
probably contributed to the collapse of Communist societies, in the
period leading to 1991.

Noting that in both the Communist world and the capitalist West, the end
of the “Golden Age” in the late 1970s ushered in a new period of crisis
– across the heavily indebted societies of the Third World, Hobsbawm
observes, the 1980s were a decade of economic catastrophe – Hobsbawm
concludes *Age* *of Extremes* on a note, not of political despair, but
of extreme political and economic uncertainty.

Although he did not, by the early 1990s, foresee the growing popularity
of rightwing fundamentalist religious movements or the anti-terrorist
battles of the new century, Hobsbawm in this book portrays his Short
Twentieth Century as uniquely marked by increasingly brutal forms of
war, by ambiguous and often dysfunctional forms of revolution, and by a
general breakdown of traditional social and religious mores and
structures of cooperation, thanks largely to the advance of consumer
capitalism and capitalist individualism.

He also, toward the end of the book, remarks on the evident
incompatibility between capitalism – especially the neoliberal or “free
market” form of capitalism that Reaganite USA and Thatcherite Britain
adopted during the 1980s – with the preservation of the natural
environment.

Hobsbawm in this book completely rejects “zero growth” environmentalism,
noting that around the world, large and growing populations of poor
people, many facing unemployment, wanted more economic development in
the early 1990s, not less.  And yet, he concludes in *Age of Extremes*,
supporters of environmentally sustainable economic policies are
correct:  “In the long run, a balance \[will\] have to be struck between
humanity, the (renewable) resources it consume\[s\], and the effect of
its activities on the environment.”  No one in 1994 knew just how such a
balance can be established, Hobsbawm writes, but

One thing … was undeniable.  It would be incompatible with a world
economy based on the unlimited pursuit of profit by economic enterprises
dedicated, by definition, to this object and competing with each other
in a global free market.  From the environmental point of view, if
humanity was to have a future, the capitalism of the Crisis Decades
\[e.g. the neoliberalism of the post-Reagan and post-Thatcher years\]
could have none.”

In the last section of *Age of Extremes,* Hobsbawm therefore provides
the reader with a series of seemingly overwhelming challenges, writing
in his chapter *Towards the Millennium* that the short twentieth century
had ended “in a global disorder whose nature was unclear, and without an
obvious mechanism for either ending it or keeping it under control,”
with the added proviso:  “The reason for this impotence lay not only in
the genuine profundity and complexity of the world’s crisis, but also in
the apparent failure of all programmes, old and new, for managing or
improving the affairs of the human race.”

The collapse of the Soviet Union and its form of Communism in 1991 had
cast doubt on all forms of revolutionary socialism by the early 1990s,
Hobsbawm concludes; the experience of Thatcherite Britain by the 1990s
had shown pure free market capitalism to be dysfunctional as well.  More
worrisome were the flaws and weaknesses of social democratic mixed
economies in Europe during the crisis years that followed the Golden
Age, and most worrisome of all were the challenges posed by rapid world
population growth, climate change and other forms of environmental
crisis, as well as the ongoing breakdown of the nation state as a mode
of governance in much of the world.

Economic globalization and the transfer of industrial jobs from
high-wage Western economies to low-wage Third World economies posed
another set of unsolved problems, Hobsbawm noted in 1994, and the logic
of capitalist labor-saving efforts indicated that the ongoing automation
of work was likely to create added problems with unemployment.

In the last few pages of *Age of Extremes,* accordingly, Hobsbawm states
that “What I have written cannot tell us whether and how humanity can
solve problems it faces at the end of the millennium.”   Yet it is
clear, he concludes, that “behind the opaque cloud of our ignorance and
the uncertainty of detailed outcomes, the historical forces that shaped
the century \[are\] continuing to operate. We live in a world captured,
uprooted and transformed by the titanic economic and techno-scientific
process of the development of capitalism, which has dominated the past
two or three centuries.”

There is good reason to think that this essentially capitalist process
cannot continue indefinitely, *The Age of Extremes* adds, since “the
forces generated by the techno-scientific economy are now great enough
to destroy the environment, that is to say, the material foundations of
human life,” while likewise threatening the “some of the social
foundations of the capitalist economy.”

In later books published before his death, such as *How to Change the
World,* (a series of essays on the merits and limits of Marxism),
Hobsbawm went on to suggest that the problems with the line of
development inspired by the Bolshevik Revolution do not have to doom all
future hopes for socialist change.  He also makes a few hopeful asides
to this effect in *Age of Extremes*.  But to Hobsbawm in 1994, both
Soviet-style central economic planning and Western capitalism on the
“free market” model had proved their bankruptcy, and the global history
of the Short Twentieth Century had shown itself to be far more
complicated than most capitalists and most socialists of his age were
willing to acknowledge.  In *Age of Extremes,* Hobsbawm fails to provide
simple answers to the century’s violence, economic turbulence,
environmental distress and scientific upheaval; his attempt to grapple
with its complexity, though, is something socialists should be able to
learn from.

[*Abortion Rights and Reproductive Justice: Continuing the
Discussion*](http://dsadc.org/abortion-rights-and-reproductive-justice-continuing-the-discussion/)

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

*By Kurt Stand*

Abortion rights, if they are to be meaningful for all women, need to be
linked to other rights women are too often denied.  Genuine reproductive
justice therefore entails access to services and multiple other
important legal and social protections.  Explaining how existing rights
can be protected while also expanding services within the context of
current political realities were the themes of presentations given at
Metro DSA’s March 17 Socialist Salon by Michelle Woods, public and
legislative affairs manager, Planned Parenthood Metropolitan of
Washington and Tucker O’Donnell, PPMW’s director of education.  A
wide-ranging discussion amongst the more than 20 attendees followed.

Lisa Stand introduced the meeting by referring to a demonstration held
in front of the Supreme Court two weeks earlier as the Court was
considering *Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt*, a case that
challenges the constitutionality of a Texas law that has led to closure
of more than half the abortion clinics in the state.  The rally called
attention to how such laws undermine the formal legality of abortion by
creating obstacles such that many women – poor and working class, young
or abused, single or unsupported and, overwhelming black and Latina –
are unable to obtain one.

The sudden death of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia in mid-February
means that the Court is unlikely to allow the Texas law to be used as a
precedent elsewhere in the country.   But the 4-4 divide on the Court
means that it is also unlikely to strike the law down, and thus
legislation causing abortion clinics to close or forcing them to turn
away potential patients, will remain in place.  The solution to this
situation, therefore, must be political.  Politics which were made
visible at the rally, a multiracial, multigenerational gathering putting
forward positive demands that spoke to full reproductive rights – and
therefore social rights – for all women, embodying therefore the
principles of reproductive justice.

O’Donnell opened by describing her work helping high school students to
develop and strengthen an understanding of healthy relationships and
consent, both fundamental to any personal understanding of the social
meaning of reproductive justice.  This also brings home the limitation
of many current discussions, which isolates individual circumstances
from any broader context.  For example, when defenders of abortion
rights argue that it should at least be available for victims of rape,
they often fail to the ask why so many women are so victimized, to raise
the reality that assaults on women’s bodies by laws which restrict
choice is the flip side of assault in the form of violence against
women, of violence against women, of domestic abuse.  Regarding
teenagers, O’Donnell added the critical importance of men being part of
the conversation, otherwise all the pressure is on women.

Woods talked about that broader context.  She noted that the phrase
“reproductive justice,” gets us away from “choice,” which is individual,
too narrow and not strong enough to convey the full meaning of what is
at stake.  By contrast, bringing justice into the equation can
demonstrate how choice is integral to women’s physical, mental,
spiritual, social and economic rights.   This is the terrain of current
struggles which in Virginia is to stop bad legislation and practices, in
Maryland is to continue to develop positive programs and in DC is to
promote best practices as well as end congressional interference with
District government initiatives (her discussion on this reinforced the
description of local challenges/possibilities put forward by
representatives of NARAL at DSA’s February membership meeting).

Both O’Donnell and Woods noted how many of the successful attacks on
abortion current stem from the 1989 Supreme Court decision *Casey v.
PA,* which gave states power to make their own laws as long as these
don’t constitute an “undue burden” for women.  That decision weakened
the abortion rights protections guaranteed by the Court’s 1973 *Roe v.
Wade* decision, they said.   The full implications of that weakening
have been made especially clear since 2011 when Tea Party candidates
made enormous gains in gubernatorial and state legislative elections, as
Republican-dominated states have placed increasingly onerous
restrictions on women’s access to abortion through the passage of Trap
Laws (Targeted Regulation of Abortion Providers) that have forced the
closure of numerous clinics.

These laws put forward unnecessary licensing provisions that cause many
clinics to close, require medical practioners to give patients false or
misleading information about the medical risk of abortion, and impose
waiting periods that are both financially and emotionally onerous.  This
is precisely what is at issue in Texas, as well as in Mississippi,
Louisiana and other states.  Trap laws put an undue burden on poor women
who are economically disenfranchised – women who are primarily black and
Latino.  A recent documentary film
[*Trapped*](http://www.trappeddocumentary.com/) gives viewers insight on
the impact of this on those who are already vulnerable.

At the same time – and contrary to the implication of abortion opponents
argument that is an isolated phenomena – abortion is common in the
United States.  According to statistics cited at the meeting, about 1/3
of women in the U.S. will have one during their fertile years, the
majority when they are in their 20s (and the majority of whom are
already mothers).  Unsurprisingly, the number of abortions goes down
when women have more sound information about reproductive health.

Questions that followed kept coming back to what we can do to do better,
such as how to better organize locally and nationally.  This discussion
was, therefore, not the end of the discussion, but part of a continual
process that we have to return to again and again.  As reproductive
rights historian Linda Gordon puts it, laws to limit abortion and to
reinforce gender inequality are both a form of oppression in their own
right and – in their appeal to sexism “entice poor, working-, and
middle-class citizens to vote against their economic interests.”
([**False Protection, Real Oppression: Opposing Anti-abortion
Legislation by Linda
Gordon**](http://www.dsausa.org/false_protection_real_oppression_opposing_anti_abortion_legislation),
**Democratic Left**, Spring 2016).

 

The links below provide background information that can also help
further stimulate discussion on the reproductive justice issues
discussed at the Salon:

 

**Background**

-   **The Hyde Amendment** bars federal dollars for Medicaid to
    cover abortion. Congressional interference with DC governance makes
    matters even worse for women on Medicaid
    here. [*http://dcabortionfund.org/2015/06/whats-the-hyde-amendment-anyway/*](http://dcabortionfund.org/2015/06/whats-the-hyde-amendment-anyway/)

-   **SisterSong**, women of color organizing for justice in the South,
    defines “Reproductive Justice as the human right to have children,
    not have children, and parent the children we have in safe and
    healthy environments. Over the years, we have expanded RJ to include
    the human right to bodily autonomy from any form of reproductive
    oppression.”
     [*http://sistersong.net/reproductive-justice/*](http://sistersong.net/reproductive-justice/)

-   **Echoing Ida**— you just have to visit their site. Here’s an
    article on how women’s reproductive choices are depicted in tv and
    film. [*http://echoingida.org/?work=nine-times-when-tv-and-film-characters-got-an-abortion-and-their-friends-supported-them*](http://echoingida.org/?work=nine-times-when-tv-and-film-characters-got-an-abortion-and-their-friends-supported-them)

-   **Women at risk for and living with HIV** have unique needs for
    reproductive health, while also needing protection from stigma and
    criminalization. [*https://pwnusa.wordpress.com/policy-agenda/reproductive-justice/*](https://pwnusa.wordpress.com/policy-agenda/reproductive-justice/)

[*BUILDING A PERMANENT, STRONG LEFT PARALLEL TO SANDERS’S CAMPAIGN:
HAROLD MEYERSON LEADS A
CONVERSATION*](http://dsadc.org/building-a-permanent-strong-left-parallel-to-sanders-campaign-harold-meyerson-leads-a-conversation/)

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

*By Woody Woodruff*

“Why are there socialists in America?” asked political reporter Harold
Meyerson. The obvious relish with which he turned [*Werner
Sombart*](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=7&ved=0ahUKEwjIi-mT_tbLAhVIWSYKHe44AZsQFghQMAY&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nyu.edu%2Fsteinhardt%2Fe%2Fpdf%2Fhumsocsci%2Fmias%2Freadings07%2F21.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFB7xd8SjAPvftboygB56Nns0sOJA&sig2=mUrxQ-0hJaFHaFowm3YY5A&cad=rja)’s
“Why is there no socialism in America?” on its head set the tone for a
well-attended conclave March 12 on how to turn the Bernie Sanders
campaign – win or lose – into a permanent left movement, “Continuing the
Political Revolution.”

The one-day conference at the Communication Workers of America
international headquarters in downtown DC was put on by the Metro DC
Democratic Socialists of America.

Meyerson suggested that the question of why socialists, why now was a
useful angle into the creation of an ongoing movement. Polling shows, he
said, that acceptance of not only the idea of socialism but the personal
identification as a socialist was wider even than the considerable
electoral success of the Sanders campaign, which has taken the
Democratic Party establishment (and maybe even some longtime socialists)
by surprise.

DSA founder Michael Harrington, Meyerson said, saw an “invisible social
democracy” within the Democratic Party and it is now becoming visible
via Sanders. He said socialism actually began to emerge around 2011-2012
from the perennial low acceptance in the US that was a residue of the
Cold War era.

Why? “It’s not clear people know that much about socialism,” Meyerson
conceded. But they know that “capitalism isn’t working” (except for the
one percent) and that leads them to be more open to alternatives.

Meyerson attended a debate between Sanders and Hillary Clinton in New
Hampshire and found a useful analytic device in the different
noisemakers used by supporters of the two candidates. Clinton’s
supporters used a “Jedi wand” that made a distinctive sound – one that
was quite audible during Sanders’s speech when he hit his signature
themes like single-payer health care, free college and a major
infrastructure effort. “There is something happening at the base of the
\[Democratic\] Party,” he said “… not only has Clinton been moved left
by the Sanders campaign, but “Bernie didn’t find young people \[a major
supporting cohort\] – young people found Bernie. Michigan found Bernie.”

“We may be having a political realignment… beyond our comprehension,” he
said later during a lengthy and fertile question-and-answer session.

Part of the political realignment is the broadening of political
expression and action. Brooks Sunkett, vice president for public
employees of the hosting Communication Workers of America, introduced
Meyerson with an account of the union’s endorsement process – which
chose Sanders.

Sunkett compared Sanders’s positions and past work to those of his
opponent, Clinton, saying the union’s rank and file discerned the
difference on issues of trade, race relations (“admirable”) and other
campaign staples such as the ones that Clinton supporters had applauded
in New Hampshire. Unions, he said, were aware they were under attack in
the courts and from employers. “When the 401K was introduced, it was
supposed to be a *supplement* to a \[defined benefit\] pension. Now,
it’s a *pension*.

The Sanders campaign, he said is “a revolution that \[CWA\] needs to be
a part of.”

Few international unions besides CWA have endorsed Sanders; many have
endorsed Clinton (though some of their locals have broken away for
Sanders). Meyerson observed that although most internationals were not
asking their members whom they should endorse, it was an improvement
over the first campaign in which he worked, in which the AFL-CIO
endorsement and that of all its member unions came from the ultimate top
down. “It came from \[Lane\] Kirkland,” the then-president of the
AFL-CIO, he was told. “That was it.”

Under pressure from members and local unions, the AFL-CIO has stayed
neutral so far in the Democratic primaries.

Meyerson spoke before voters went to the polls in big Midwestern states
and in Florida, but he accurately said Sanders would “do well” in
Illinois and Ohio. Though he won no states in that round he was
competitive in many (Missouri was too close to call for several days)
and, because the delegates were awarded proportionally, he came away
with a good haul of them. Meyerson said Sanders would go to the
Democratic Convention in July with solid backing and the juice to affect
the platform positively on issues of trade policy, health care policy
and campaign finance.

The parallel organizing activity for radical policies that could travel
and grow with the Sanders campaign’s visibility and popularity was the
other piece of the puzzle for this conference. Meyerson said DSA would
have a role in a coalition that could advance the broader left agenda,
within and without the Democratic Party, with “strength on the ground”
coming from organizations like the [*Working Families
Party*](http://workingfamilies.org/) and [*National People’s
Action*](http://npa-us.org/) (both of which have Maryland state-level
affiliates).

Managing the establishment of a stronger, more permanent left in the US
is complicated because “the left has a unity problem,” Meyerson said,
but the solution is “too important not to figure out.” He suggested that
the terrain of struggle with most benefit is between states and their
cities. “Cities have never been more liberal and states have never been
more controlled by the right,” he said, and the fights, for example, for
the \$15/hour minimum wage had huge vitality in cities and set even
red-state cities like Birmingham, Ala. against their state governments.

In an extended, productive question period Meyerson suggested that
Sanders, as a candidate, was pinned down by his own emphasis on class
politics, a “class-oriented mindset” – more so than would be true of
many members of DSA – and that has limited his ability to appeal to
identity-based tendencies like Black Lives Matter or more generally the
intersectional issues of race and inequality.

The evident Wall Street power within the corporate wing of Democrats –
which dogs Clinton and gives Sanders grist for his critique – gained
strength as the Republicans “morphed” into a social-issues monolith,
Meyerson said. But he has hope that “something is happening at the base
of the Democratic Party” – perhaps represented by the
[*endorsement*](http://senatorpinsky.org/) of Sanders by Sen. Paul
Pinsky of Prince George’s County. Pinsky is a reliable labor-left voice
in the centrist Democratic blue state, and more recently (March 29)
announced as one of Sanders’s 15-member [*Maryland steering
committee*](http://www.marylandscramble.com/2016/03/29/sanders-announces-md-steering-committee/).
But his statement set the Sanders effort in a wider context: “The
outpouring of support for Sen. Sanders clearly represents a desire to
build a strong, clear, progressive wing within the Democratic Party — in
selecting a nominee for president and *beyond* the election. **He has
clearly articulated the problem of the concentration of wealth in the
hands of a very few** and how this concentrated wealth has come to
assert its will in politics, elections and Congress.” \[emphasis in
original\].

Asked how DSA members could recapture the socialist perspective that all
Sanders’s popular proposals are connected in a broad contest with
capitalist practices, Meyerson suggested that “the banks” – the
financialization of capital and its erosion of even the palliative
Fordism that tempered capitalism until the late ‘70s – were the right
image to use in establishing the connections among those issues that
brought the sound of Jedi wands from the Hillary Clinton cohort in New
Hampshire.

Clinton’s incremental leftward policy moves – such as on trade policy –
 apparently in the face of Sanders’s challenge, actually denoted the
Democratic Party’s leftward move at the base, Meyerson said – Bernie is
not the only factor. “That’s what gives me some hope… there really is
something happening at the base of the Democratic Party.”

Hillary, he said, “knows she can’t go back to the ‘90s.”

Pizza (which vanished quickly before the overflow crowd of 70-plus) and
breakout sessions followed Meyerson’s well-received remarks, with six
working groups tackling questions of both granular strategy for a
stronger left, and galvanizing many new to socialism through the Sanders
effort.

Merrill Miller, a co-chair of Metro DC DSA’s work for Sanders through
national DSA’s independent expenditure effort, “We Need Bernie,”
observed:

“The breakout groups contained individuals from many backgrounds, from
those who had long been familiar with DSA but were finally interested in
becoming more active to those who had been unfamiliar with the term
“democratic socialism” until Bernie Sanders’ campaign. Similarly, the
breakout groups contained individuals with extensive organizing and
activist experience, as well as those who longed to become more
politically active but until this event had no idea how to do so. This
wide range of experience allowed seasoned activists to teach new
activists, while also revealing the ways in which the Bernie Sanders
campaign has brought new people to democratic socialism and inspired
passion for Leftist causes.”

This cross-fertilization effect was reinforced by comments from Metro DC
DSA activist Jessie Mannisto, who like Miller led one of the groups:

“Our breakout group contained a good mix of perspectives.  We had
Boomers and Millennials; DSA members and Bernie campaign volunteers who
aren’t part of DSA; people who were wary of the S-word and people who
were ready to see it revitalized for the American mainstream.  The
highlight of our discussion was the need to think of new ways to
mobilize Bernie voters — including young people who are excited about
Bernie but have never voted, and people who don’t vote in local and
state level elections — both in the primary and beyond.”

From DSA member and group leader Sammy Almashat: “We were about six
people and from different backgrounds, ranging from Marxist to
progressive democrat. One person spoke at length of their experience in
and disillusionment with the Democratic Party, a sentiment most of us
shared. There was palpable enthusiasm about campaigning for Bernie and
everyone was curious to know more about what DSA was doing on that (and
other) fronts. Overall, a very amiable conversation and hopefully not
the last.”

[*Carrying a Legacy Forward: Joslyn Williams and the Metro DC Labor
Movement*](http://dsadc.org/carrying-a-legacy-forward-joslyn-williams-and-the-metro-dc-labor-movement/)

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

*By Kurt Stand*

After nearly 30 years, Joslyn Williams is stepping down as president of
Metro Washington Council, AFL-CIO.  He is succeeded by two people –
Jackie Jeter, president of Amalgamated Transit Workers Local 689, will
serve as Council President (the first woman elected to that position),
and Carlos Jimenez, most recently field organizer for Jobs with Justice,
will take on the new position of Executive Director.  Each embraces the
social unionism – unionism that connects workplace rights to workers’
democratic and civic rights – Williams espoused.

In order to fully appreciate the meaning of this moment when the torch
is being passed to a new generation of leaders, it is worthwhile to look
back upon the tradition of struggle within which Williams played such an
important role.

**Labor Council History**

Or perhaps we should say pre-history.   Unions in Washington DC and
nearby Maryland and Virginia have a much richer, albeit deeply
conflicted, past than is often recalled. By the late 19^th^ century,
craft unions developed real strength at a time when light industry and
small manufacturing were a central part of the local economy.  Later,
during the New Deal years, federal workers and other public employees
unions experienced a surge of growth, coinciding with the growth of the
federal workforce.  Those unions had a left perspective and with that a
focus on racial justice – twin concerns that led to McCarthy-era purges
and blacklisting that undermined their strength and progressive
perspective.

As to the more traditional craft unions, most in the Washington DC area
accepted (and reinforced) the segregation which was fixed in the local
economy of DC as well as throughout Virginia and Maryland.  Thus by the
mid-1960s local labor was particularly conservative in outlook and –
apart from pockets of strengths in skilled trades – weak in its
bargaining power.  The sea change brought about by the civil rights
movement’s challenge to racism built into law, custom, industry and
government, was to have a profound impact on our region, bringing to the
fore people who saw the connection between the need to build labor the
labor movement by changing the labor movement and thereby participate in
changing our political environment.  And this brings us to Joslyn
Williams.

Born in Jamaica, he moved to Washington DC when he was 16 and later
studied at Howard University.  After graduation and working a variety of
jobs such as a taxi cab driver (common in an era when most professional
doors were closed to blacks no matter what their educational
credentials), Williams gained employment at the Library of Congress. 
Like many federal agencies at the time, it was an institution which
suffered from control by a federal government that even in the era of
Kennedy and Johnson still acceded to the power of Dixiecrats in Congress
(i.e. white southern Democratic representatives in the House and Senate
who were unapologetic in their advocacy of racism as public policy).

Thus black workers could not advance, no matter what their credentials,
no matter what degrees they earned, no matter what their seniority – a
situation that the American Federation of Government Employees (AFGE)
had accepted.  Williams did not, serving first as a shop steward and,
from 1970, as president of the local, he led a militant workplace
campaign to push for institutional change at the Library of Congress.

**Social Justice Unionism**

The change in the air stimulated by 1960s activism led to other
upheavals in unions, including a challenge to the particularly
conservative leadership of the local labor council.  Robert Peterson of
the Typographical Union (printing having been an important industry in
the DC area) organized that challenge helping to bring more militant and
progressive views to the Council when he was elected as president in
1975.  Williams was later elected as his assistant, and then in 1982 as
Council President in his own right – the first time an African American
was elected to that post, though blacks have formed the majority of the
city’s population (and certainly the majority of the working class) of
DC and the broader metropolitan area since the AFL had first chartered a
Council in 1896.

But this is a story of change – the old guard leadership that opposed
the civil rights movement came from ATU Local 689, Jeter’s union and
today one of the most militant and progressive locals on the Council. 
Subsequent to Williams’s election, UFCW Local 400 and HERE Local 25 used
disputes over small policy issues as a reason to disaffiliate, though
such disputes had not led locals to disaffiliate in previous years, when
Council officers were all white.

Both Locals eventually reaffiliated and played an important role in
organizing campaigns and in supporting the direction Labor Council
policy was to take thereafter.  And showing the complexity of the
process, construction unions in the region, though often a bulwark of
labor conservatism in other cities, and sometimes disagreeing with
Williams’ progressive initiatives, remained affiliated and supported the
revival of unionism that was taking place under his leadership.  As
testament to the path of internal unity, today nearly 200 locals with a
combined membership of over 150,000 —   the vast majority of eligible
locals — are affiliates.

Growth like that was possible only because of the policies adopted:
Quickly after assuming office, Williams took initiatives in support of
the fight for pay equity for women workers, to improve workers health
and safety conditions, reduce health costs and maintain rent control. 
Deeply engaged in the political process, the Council supported
pro-labor, progressive candidates for local office.  Yet that support
was never unconditional; Williams was always ready to criticize those in
public office when they narrowed their vision or compromised their
commitment to working people.  And by that, he meant all working
people.  As, for example in 1991, street fighting erupted in Mt.
Pleasant after a Latino was shot by a policewoman.

In this complex moment in DC’s history, Williams issued a statement
calling on city leaders to address the underlying conditions that led to
the violence and chiding those city leaders who condemned the violence
while forgetting the causes by reminding them of their own roots in the
social movements of a then still very recent past.  That past included
the call for DC statehood, a call and a goal which Williams always
supported, unlike others with jurisdictions that included parts of
Maryland and Virginia as well as our nation’s capital.

In a sense this is what social justice unionism is all about.  The
Council has (to name just several of many instances) supported
organizing drives for parking lot attendants and taxi cab drivers,
supported local unions negotiating campaigns at hotels, warehouses and
grocery stores, supported municipal, state and federal workers whenever
their rights have been threatened.  Affiliates and activists also
mobilized under the Council’s banner in solidarity for workers engaged
in local labor disputes that took on a national character as when
pilots, flight attendants, and baggage handlers struck at Eastern
Airlines in 1989; National Airport – the union-busting which took place
there perhaps the only reason later renaming it for Reagan is apt –
being one of the focal points of the struggle.  So too, solidarity was
simultaneously built on behalf of miners during the Pittston strike in
southern Virginia and West Virginia.

Workers’ struggles, however, extend beyond those that can be resolved by
bargaining, as evidenced by the Council’s engagement in the successful
fight for a minimum wage hike indexed to inflation in DC in 2015, and to
similar campaigns for a living wage in Maryland’s Prince George’s and
Montgomery Counties and for paid sick leave and just hours across our
region.  These campaigns all speak to Williams’ willingness to connect
issues, equally reflected in his role in the Coalition of Black Trade
Unionists, Jobs with Justice, Labor Campaign for Single Payer Health
Care, Alliance for Retired Americans.  His engagement with these and
other such bodies expresses in practice his commitment to an expansive
solidarity.  This means supporting the struggles and needs of non-union
as well as unionized workers, premised on the understanding that the
mutuality at the heart of labor is about giving as well as receiving
support – and it is about meeting workers needs off the job as well as
well as on it.

No institution built up under Williams’ leadership embodies that as much
as the Community Services Agency – which has established a
pre-apprenticeship program to help young people gain the reading, math
and other skills they need for full apprenticeship opportunities.  CSA
also helps families deal with job loss, health crisis, substance abuse,
sudden unemployment.  The importance of the Agency’s work stems from the
Council’s recognition that the role of the labor movement is to be there
for working people 24 hours a day – whether on a picket line,
participating in an election, or taking part in a charitable drive.

With this framework, Williams was already acting in the spirit of Union
Cities, initiated when John Sweeney was elected AFL-CIO president in
1995.  It was a program to breathe new life in the labor movement by
rebuilding central labor councils as vibrant organizations that speak to
labor’s entire program – on and off the job, building union unity within
while building union-unity with community, civic, political, and
faith-based organizations that engage in social justice advocacy.

Many labor councils failed to act on the possibilities this created, but
it fit within the vision and initiatives long a part of Metro DC
unionism.  One further aspect of this commitment to labor touching all
aspects of workers’ lives has been the Labor Film Fest, which has
developed into LaborFest –  bringing music, film, poetry, art that
address union heritage, contemporary issues and possibilities of the
future to working people in venues across the metropolitan area.  All
this speaks to a broader understanding of what trade unionism can be at
its best.  And it validates Williams dual perspective – not only do
unions need to change to better defend the rights of all workers, they
are capable of changing and a commitment to that process, is a necessary
component of all struggles for democracy, civic rights and economic
justice.

**Peace and Global Solidarity**

This often means navigating among differing and conflicting points of
view.  Metropolitan labor councils, organs of the AFL-CIO, and
responsible to the parent federation.  As membership organizations, they
are responsible to affiliates who elect leadership and pay dues.  And
they also stand apart as the most recognizable local voice of unionism
to the public and to politicians within their jurisdiction.  Such
multiple layers of responsibility can be paralyzing, but they also
create opportunities for leadership to lead by providing linkages across
lines of division.  But such a possibility can only succeeded if
premised on the view of the long haul implicit in the concept of
changing within and without that guided Williams throughout his tenure –
including when looking out upon the world.

As noted, when Williams began his tenure at the Library of Congress, he
was a member of AFGE.  Through the years, AFGE had evolved into a union
that fights for its members and so while defending the necessary role of
federal programs and federal workers in maintaining the quality of our
collective life, it has been vocal when needed in criticizing its
employer – that same federal government.  But that wasn’t always the
case, for in its early history AFGE was weak and insecure and so
particularly unwilling to challenge its employer – the Executive Branch
– on non-workplace issues.  And therefore, its leadership in the
1960s-early 70s was adamant in its support of the war in Vietnam (as was
the then-leadership of the AFL-CIO).   AFGE’s leadership, at that time,
put in trusteeship and expelled locals that passed anti-war resolutions
– including the one at the Library of Congress.  Williams, however,
among those opposed to that war, protected his Local’s assets and played
a key role in the ability of those federal worker locals to remain
intact by joining AFSCME – whose president Jerry Wurf spoke out early
against the carnage being launched from our shores.  So when Williams
was elected Council President he was Executive Director of its local
council of federal workers (AFSCME Council 26).

Williams’ opposition to war abroad and commitment to global solidarity
have continued through to the present.  One manifestation of this was
the space and support he gave to the Central American Labor solidarity
movement – a movement which brought together locals opposed to US policy
in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua during the civil wars in those
countries in the 1980’s notwithstanding official AFL-CIO policy at the
time that supported Reagan’s foreign policy even while being punished by
his domestic policy (with AFGE by then a leader of the peace movement
nationally alongside the Machinists, and the Clothing Workers – one of
the  predecessor unions of UNITE-HERE).  He also opposed US invasions of
Iraq, gave support to ousted Haitian president Jean-Bernard Aristede and
stood as a supporter of Michael Manley, the socialist head of state in
his native Jamaica.

Most outstanding, however, was Williams’s deep engagement in the
movement to end South African apartheid, taking steps far in advance of
the AFL-CIO.  In fact, he was one of the first AFL-CIO leaders to call
for freedom for Nelson Mandela, doing so at a public rally in the early
1980s at a time when the Federation’s national leadership was too
willing to accept the State Department’s definition of the ANC as a
“terrorist” and a “communist” organization.  Thereafter, Williams worked
closely with the Coalition of Black Trade Unionists in the creation of
local union anti-apartheid committees, led the Council to give support
for the Auto Workers campaign to free imprisoned unionist Moses Mayekiso
and committed major resources on behalf of the Mine Workers campaign to
boycott Shell because of its support for the racist South African
government.  This solidarity escaped the sight and memory of many in US
union circles, but not the South Africans.  When Mandela gained his
freedom and did a triumphal tour through the United States, it was Jos
Williams who was the AFL-CIO leader who introduced him to the thousands
who came to celebrate at the Convention Center.

In the years since, Williams has worked to oppose all those free trade
deals that rob workers here and abroad in the name of global capital,
and has worked with the Solidarity Center in support of workers fighting
for justice in all corners of the world.  This is the arena in which he
plans to continue to engage in the future.  As he told a reporter from
the *Washington Informer*:

“Workers of the world are not separated anymore by boundaries or by sea
…  There are companies with employees in third world countries where
they go to find cheap labor and our survival in this country depends on
what we do to those businesses who flee to seek cheaper markets.

“By doing that, those companies have driven down the quality of life in
our own country so we’ve got to follow them. We’ve got to organize our
brothers and sisters elsewhere to make sure that their quality of life
is raised … \[and\] stop the exploitation of workers by pitting workers
here against workers abroad.”

**Moving Forward**

This is the legacy left to the Metropolitan Labor Council’s new
leadership.  Jeter’s work as ATU Local 689 president and leadership in
the fight for the rights of their members and the safety of passengers,
testifies to her ability to build upon the linkages made under William’s
leadership as well as to forge new ones.  So too Jimenez’ experiences at
Jobs with Justice will serve him well in building coalitions and
connecting issues that are essential to labor’s ability to continually
renew itself as new challenges are posed.

As a parting thought it is well to recall Williams’s introduction of
Mandela on that day in DC now more than 20 years ago.  He recited the
lines of *Solidarity Forever*, giving new meaning to an old song, by
paying tribute to the worldwide struggle for freedom that is the true
meaning of trade unionism:

When the Union’s Inspiration through the workers’ blood shall run,

There can be no power greater anywhere beneath the sun.

Yet what force on earth is weaker than the feeble strength of one?

But the Union makes us strong.

…

They have taken untold millions that they never toiled to earn,

But without our brain and muscle not a single wheel can turn.

We can break their haughty power gain our freedom when we learn

That the Union makes us strong.

…

In our hands is placed a power greater than their hoarded gold;

Greater than the might of armies magnified a thousand-fold.

We can bring to birth a new world from the ashes of the old.

For the Union makes us strong.

 

*Solidarity forever*!

 

 

Sources:

D.C. Labor’s Struggle: Solidarity Still Seems Like a Remote Dream by
Suzanne Crowell, *Democratic Socialist*, September 1986.

 

Joslyn Williams Passing Baton to New Leadership; After 34 Years at Labor
Council Helm – *Union City*, 1/20/16.

 

Longtime Union President Steps Aside by Stacy M. Brown, *The Washington
Informer*, 2/24/16.

 

My own memories.

[*GOOD READS FOR
SOCIALISTS*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-6/) April 2016

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

NOTE: An increasingly important source of our “Good Reads” is the
absolutely essential left aggregator [*Portside*](http://portside.org/).
Much, though certainly not all, of our proffered material appears there
too, and if you find yourself chafing (and we are sure you do) at the
long wait between monthly episodes of “Good Reads” you can emulate the
Charles Dickens fans of 1840s New York, whose thirst for the latest
episodes of such cliffhangers as “The Old Curiosity Shop” led Gotham’s
dailies to charter fast packets to go out and meet the ships from the
Old World. They would rush back bearing those latest chapters in
magazines like Dickens’s own *All the Year Round* to his [*rioting
fans*](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/07/30/tune-in-next-week)
on the docks, intent on knowing whether Little Nell really dies. Such
fervor is less often seen for the great texts of the Left that are
published every week or so somewhere. But if you subscribe directly to
Portside (free, and basically run by volunteers) you can get email
notifications of fresh new stuff daily or weekly from a variety of
sources. After you have paid your DSA dues and donated to the Sanders
campaign you should donate to *Portside*, as well.

**&gt;&gt;**A thorough historical overview of how the Left has tackled
the question of technological advance – its oppressive potential when
owned or controlled by capitalists, as well as its emancipatory
potential when owned or controlled by a democratic polity. It’s by Paul
Heideman in *Jacobin*’s Spring 2015 technology issue; a year old now but
worth a read.

[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/04/braverman-gramsci-marx-technology/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/04/braverman-gramsci-marx-technology/)

**&gt;&gt;**The Congressional Progressive Caucus has issued its 2017
People’s Budget, keeping the faith with an array of programs and
projects to boost employment and empower communities. Here’s a link to
their summary, which in turn leads to the full bill documents:
[*http://cpc-grijalva.house.gov/the-peoples-budget-prosperity-not-austerity-invest-in-america/*](http://cpc-grijalva.house.gov/the-peoples-budget-prosperity-not-austerity-invest-in-america/)
And here’s a brief account and promo from the Campaign for America’s
Future:
[*https://ourfuture.org/20160310/why-we-need-the-peoples-budgets-1-trillion-infrastructure-plan*](https://ourfuture.org/20160310/why-we-need-the-peoples-budgets-1-trillion-infrastructure-plan)

**&gt;&gt;**Tom Frank has analyzed speeches by Donald Trump and argues
that dissatisfaction over trade policy outweighs racism as the likely
reason Trump has gained working-class support.
[*http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/donald-trump-why-americans-support?CMP=share\_btn\_fb*](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/donald-trump-why-americans-support?CMP=share_btn_fb)

**&gt;&gt;**As socialists we purport to know more about the entanglement
of race and class at the intersection than the average person. Check out
this nuts and bolts test bench from Standing Up for Racial Justice
(SURJ), a white allies organization, and think anew about what we still
have to learn.

[*http://www.showingupforracialjustice.org/cross\_class\_capacity\_tool*](http://www.showingupforracialjustice.org/cross_class_capacity_tool)

**&gt;&gt;**Carl Davidson has updated his thought-provoking thesis about
the US six-party system to adapt to the current disorderly political
landscape.
[*http://carldavidson.tumblr.com/post/141210444802/leaders-of-the-gops-three-parties-trump-of-the*](http://carldavidson.tumblr.com/post/141210444802/leaders-of-the-gops-three-parties-trump-of-the)

**&gt;&gt;**Jack Metzgar, in *In These Times*, argues that a stereotype
of the white working class “demographic” is growing within mainstream
media and the distortions are bending the narrative of the presidential
race. First seen in *Portside*.

[*http://inthesetimes.com/working/entry/18977/whos\_actually\_voting\_for\_trump\_time\_to\_stop\_blaming\_only\_the\_white\_working\_*](http://inthesetimes.com/working/entry/18977/whos_actually_voting_for_trump_time_to_stop_blaming_only_the_white_working_)

**&gt;&gt;Reversing Inequality, as Seen by *Foreign Affairs* and *The
Nation.*  **

Not only the reliably liberal editors of *The Nation,* but also those of
*Foreign Affairs,* which some leftists consider a prop of American
empire, have lately weighed in on the problem of growing inequality
under today’s capitalism.  Democratic socialists with a tolerance for
reformism might want to glance at how each magazine addresses the topic.

The cover of the March 7, 2016 *Nation* bears the title “Game Changers: 
How we can unrig the rules and reverse runaway Inequality,” and alerts
readers to a special section inside outlining eight specific plans to
create greater economic equality in the U.S. economy.  These include,
among other things, helping black workers to fight for union rights and
the protection of public-sector jobs, imposing a small financial
transaction tax on Wall Street to fund needed social spending, tackling
metastasizing levels of student loan debt, and imposing new taxes on
luxury consumption (like jet airline travel, for example) involving high
levels of fossil fuel use.

The December 15 issue of *Foreign Affairs* features a somewhat more
theoretical cover story by Pierre Rosenvallon called “How to Create a
Society of Equals: Overcoming Today’s Crisis of Inequality.” 
Rosenvallon states that the relatively greater levels of income equality
in capitalist societies during the middle part of the 20th century were
primarily due to three factors: a fear of socialist/communist revolution
that inspired even rightwing autocrats – similar to Bismarck in the late
19th century — to support social welfare legislation, a growing sense of
national community that drew together several societies out of necessity
during the two world wars, and a sense among intellectuals that poverty
does not reflect individual character failings, but the operation of
social institutions.  All three factors are largely lacking in
contemporary societies, Rosenvallon concludes, and “Only a more robust
vision of democratic equality—based on the singularity of individuals,
reciprocal relations among them, and a social commonality—can provide
the foundation for broadly accepted public policies that can attack the
trends toward inequality that are hollowing out contemporary economies
and polities.”  Democratic socialists might not welcome every detail in
Rosenvallon’s description of how to achieve this, though.

*Foreign Affairs* has a pay wall, but non-subscribers who register may
access one free article a month.  Rosenvallon’s article can be found at
[*https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2015-12-14/how-create-society-equals*](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2015-12-14/how-create-society-equals)
.  To read the *Nation* March 7 issue, you may need to go to the
library, or you can subscribe online for less than \$10.  See
[*http://www.thenation.com/archive/*](http://www.thenation.com/archive/)
.\
***— Andy Feeney***

**&gt;&gt;**Astra Taylor, author of [**The People’s
Platform**](http://dsadc.org/economic-and-cultural-consequences-of-the-internet/),
shifts from Internet culture to the new culture of universities,
commodified to attract wealthier students because support for public
universities has fallen so drastically. Another from *Portside*,
originally in *The Nation*…

[*http://www.thenation.com/article/universities-are-becoming-billion-dollar-hedge-funds-with-schools-attached/*](http://www.thenation.com/article/universities-are-becoming-billion-dollar-hedge-funds-with-schools-attached/)

**&gt;&gt;Shakespeare & Global Warming: A “Midsummer Night’s Dream” Set
Under Water**

It will probably never win over the coal industry, but the Miami City
Ballet has just issued its own unique artistic statement on climate
change.   The set design and costumes for the Ballet’s current
performance of a George Ballanchine version of the Shakespeare comedy “A
Midsummer Night’s Dream,” as many dance reviewers have noted, are
supposed to make the action seem to take place underwater.   Thus the
comic character Bottom, who in Shakespeare’s script magically acquires
the head of a donkey, in this production acquires the head of a Florida
manatee instead.  The set, as described by *The Miami Herald,* includes
a back wall and transparent scrim at stage front on which shifting
images of “enormous, ethereal sea plants and creatures” are projected,
while the costumes combine “silvery, shimmery unitards, feathery seaweed
skirts \[and\] swooping coral headdresses” to make the dancers seem like
darting fish.  According to an interview in a Miami-based email
newsletter called *The New Tropic*, the set and costume designer Michele
Oka Doner, daughter of a former Miami Beach mayor, wanted the production
both to reflect the natural beauty of the ocean front in South Florida
and to evoke the risks of it all being wrecked by ongoing environmental
change.  Florida governor Rick Scott has forbidden state employees to
even speak the words “climate change,” Doner noted, and “Placing the
ballet underwater … was a call to look at and celebrate what we have
before we lose it.”  For texts of what various reviewers have written
about the production (including a bemused piece by *New York Times*
dance critic Alasdair Macaulay, who found Doner’s sets and costumes
nonsensical but “agreeably harmless”) see the Miami City Ballet’s web
site at
[*http://www.miamicityballet.org/*](http://www.miamicityballet.org/) . 
***–Andy Feeney***

 

**&gt;&gt;**Even though the Democratic Primary continues to be tight,
there’s already a back-and-forth on the general topic of “Bernie or
bust,” a sentiment that suggests that if Bernie is not on the ballot in
November then progressives might as well stay home. This has brought
reaction, of course. Here is the advice of Sam Smith, who once published
a progressive periodical best remembered as *the Progressive Review* on
paper in DC. He now publishes an online daily aggregator/blog from
Maine, *Undernews*.
[*http://prorevnews.blogspot.com/2016/03/some-notes-for-bernie-backers.html?utm\_source=feedburner&utm\_medium=email&utm\_campaign=Feed%3A+prorevfeed+%28UNDERNEWS%29*](http://prorevnews.blogspot.com/2016/03/some-notes-for-bernie-backers.html?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+prorevfeed+%28UNDERNEWS%29)

**&gt;&gt;Some Big Banks Stop Financing Coal-Burning Power Plants in the
US**

In a partial victory for activists fighting to curb global climate
change, several enormous U.S. banks have announced they will no longer
finance the construction of new coal-burning power plants in this
country, Michael Corkery reports in the March 21, 2016 *New York Times.*
The list now includes JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Citigroup and
Morgan Stanley.  Deutsche Bank also is backing away from the financing
of mountain-top-removal coal mining, although not from coal-based energy
production in general.  Corkery quotes a resource analyst with Standard
& Poor’s rating agency who contends that “what is happening in coal is a
downward shift that is permanent,” although he also quotes coal industry
officials who say that their industry’s current economic woes, which
partly reflect market competition from cheap and plentiful natural gas,
will prove reversible.  Corkery also cautions that the banks’ apparent
disinterest in new US coal-based power generation, which may reflect
activist campaigns by groups like the Rainforest Action Network, doesn’t
mean they are cutting off all funding to the industry completely.  JP
Morgan Chase, for example, says it will still consider lending to
coal-burning power plants overseas, “so long as they employ
environmentally sound technologies.”  For Corkery’s article in the
*Times,* go to
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/21/business/dealbook/as-coals-future-grows-murkier-banks-pull-financing.html*](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/21/business/dealbook/as-coals-future-grows-murkier-banks-pull-financing.html)
. – ***Andy Feeney***

 

[*METRO SHUTDOWN SHOWS NEED FOR INVESTMENT IN THE
SYSTEM*](http://dsadc.org/metro-shutdown-shows-need-for-investment-in-the-system/)

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

*By Bill Mosley*

The one-day shutdown of the entire Metrorail system on March 16 for
safety checks was unprecedented for our local rapid-rail system. 
Whether it was necessary has been a lively topic of debate; but new
General Manager Paul Wiedefeld obviously felt, with safety meltdowns
coming in rapid succession, that it was time to go big on safety or go
home.  The 2009 Fort Totten crash that killed nine and last year’s
electrical arcing incident that caused the death of one passenger from
smoke inhalation and sent dozens of others to the hospital were only the
ugliest symptoms of a system in crisis.  And last month’s closure might
be only the beginning:  [*Metro now is considering shutting down entire
lines for repairs for months at a
time.*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/trafficandcommuting/2016/03/30/fba8ae0a-f688-11e5-9804-537defcc3cf6_story.html?hpid=hp_local-news_no-name%3Ahomepage%2Fstory)

The current state of Metrorail represents a long, sad decline from the
palmy days of the 1970s and 1980s when the system was spanking new and a
rebuke to the dirty, often unreliable and sometimes unsafe systems in
older U.S. cities.  In the early days Metro prided itself on being as
unlike New York’s crime-ridden, rat-infested, graffiti-scarred subway
system as it could be – with clean, airy stations, graffiti-free cars
and smooth and efficient service.  Today, a ride on the New York subway
shows that Metro could learn a lesson or two from its big sister on how
to turn around an aging urban rail network.

A lot of media coverage and political sniping has cast blame on Metro
management for the deterioration of the system.  But no management,
regardless of how brilliant or dedicated it was, could succeed in the
face of decades of underinvestment in Metro by the local jurisdictions
as well as the federal government.  The lack of a dedicated local source
of revenue has been a festering wound that has left Metro short of
reliable funding since its beginnings.  This was an issue that the local
chapter of Democratic Socialists of America helped bring to light when
it spearheaded the creation of the Coalition for Fair Transit Finance
(CFTF) in 1984, demanding that Metro stop filling budget gaps with
annual fare increases and that DC, Maryland and Virginia work together
to create a dedicated funding stream for the system.  CFTF did succeed
in helping convince WMATA to forego further fare increases for several
years, but a dedicated source of funding remains an unfulfilled demand.

A region-wide gasoline tax is often suggested as a means to provide
Metro with dedicated funds.  Drivers who might object to paying a few
pennies a gallon to support Metro might consider how the Metro system –
both bus and rail – benefit all commuters in the region.  The March 16
traffic was not as bad as some had feared – largely because the federal
government allowed most of its employees to stay home – but if Metro
closed for a longer period and everyone who had access to a car used it,
the resulting gridlock would bring the region to a standstill.  In
addition, riding Metro contributes less to climate change and other
environmental ills than driving, and transit riders don’t gobble up
parking in congested areas.  Transit is a public service that benefits
everyone whether they ride it or not, and it deserves better than to be
nickeled and dimed to death.

So don’t complain about Metro – demand that your elected officials
summon the will to give it the funding it needs to fix its safety and
reliability problems before they get worse.

[*OBAMA SUPREME COURT NOMINATION: A MISSED
OPPORTUNITY*](http://dsadc.org/obama-supreme-court-nomination-a-missed-opportunity/)

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

*By Bill Mosley*

President Obama’s nomination of Merrick Garland, chief judge of the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit and a former federal prosecutor, to
the Supreme Court seat vacated by the death of Antonin Scalia was, as
the pundits have noted, intended to present the Senate with a
non-threatening, noncontroversial candidate to whom it would be hard to
object.  In the thinking of the president and his advisors, an anodyne
figure such as Garland, someone without ideological baggage or a
crusader image, would deprive Senate Republicans – who have vowed not to
give any prospective justice nominated by Obama a hearing, much less a
vote – of an excuse not to give his choice fair consideration.  If
Republicans are serious about leaving the Court one justice short for at
least nine months, until a new president takes office – and one must
believe they are – Obama, the Democratic presidential nominee and
Democratic congressional candidates can use Republican intransigence as
another club to batter the GOP at the polls this November.

Or so the thinking goes.  No doubt Garland is the paragon of “[*decency,
modesty, integrity, even-handedness, and
excellence*](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/17/us/politics/obama-supreme-court-nominee.html?_r=1)”
that Obama says he is.  Nevertheless, there is a case that Garland is
the wrong nominee for the times.  Here are some points to consider:

-   **He’s a straight, white, older man** – Call him a SWOM, for short.
    That is the demographic of which I am a member, and if we were
    populating the Court from scratch, I might insist on having this
    group represented on it.  But given that of the [*112 Supreme Court
    justices in U.S.
    history*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_United_States_Supreme_Court_Justices_by_time_in_office)
    all but six have been SWOMs (as far as we know – at least none of
    the other 106 has been openly gay) – we melanin-challenged menfolk
    could afford to stand back until better karma is in the air.  Even
    with the Court having become more diverse since the 1960s, it still
    had a SWOM majority until Scalia’s death. There were well-qualified
    women and minorities – including women of color – among the reputed
    finalists, and a 63-year-old white guy was the best Obama could come
    up with?

I make an issue of Garland’s age because the trend in recent decades has
been for presidents to nominate relatively young justices – among
incumbents, the oldest when taking office was Ruth Bader Ginsberg at 60;
the youngest was Clarence Thomas at 43 – so that they could potentially
serve on the court for decades, extending the influence of the president
who nominated them far into the future.  (Scalia, who was 49 when he
joined the Court, served as “Reagan in a Robe” for more than a quarter
century after his patron left the White House, and Reagan nominee
Anthony Kennedy is still with us).  In nominating the sexagenarian
Garland – [*the oldest nominee since Lewis Powell in
1971*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/whitehouse/standout-in-the-law-garland-would-blend-in-at-supreme-court/2016/03/17/620c2da4-ec14-11e5-a9ce-681055c7a05f_story.html)
– Obama is attempting to placate Congress by sending them a nominee who
probably wouldn’t be on the court as long as a younger justice would. 
In doing so, Obama is sabotaging his own legacy. (Perhaps in the future
we might consider a sensible reform such as limiting Supreme Court
justices to a single 10-year term, which would create more churn on the
court and be a disincentive to the subtle ageism built into the
process).

Since Republicans declared that no nominee of Obama’s would get a Senate
hearing, the only advantage of nominating anyone at all would be to
provide a weapon to wield in the November elections.  If Obama had
nominated, for instance, a strong African-American woman – [*U.S.
District Court Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson was a reported
finalist,*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/activists-push-obama-to-nominate-black-woman-to-the-supreme-court/2016/03/08/cf8aad48-e56a-11e5-b0fd-073d5930a7b7_story.html)
but she was only one of many possibilities – Democrats not only could
have hammered the Republicans on their intransigence, but on their
hostility to women and people of color as well.  That would have been a
powerful call to the Democratic base to turn out to the polls en masse. 
Obama missed his chance.

-   **He has no social-justice or activist background –** President
    Obama seems to be the last remaining person to regard Supreme Court
    justices as impartial arbiters of the law rather than
    political actors. But nearly everyone else, especially Republicans
    in the Senate, realize that the court is a third political arm of
    the government.  It has been so at least since John Adams, having
    already been defeated for re-election by Thomas Jefferson, nominated
    his Federalist ally [*John
    Marshall*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Marshall) as Chief
    Justice, and Marshall went on to be a political thorn in the side of
    Jefferson and his successors for decades to come.  The two current
    Obama-appointed justices on the Court, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena
    Kagan, have become reliable members of the liberal bloc, but neither
    took office having embraced ideological views as extreme as some
    Republican court nominees of the recent past, such as Scalia,
    Thomas, William Rehnquist and Samuel Alito (not to mention GOP
    nominees whose far-right views torpedoed their confirmations,
    including Reagan-nominated Robert Bork and failed Nixon nominees
    [*Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold
    Carswell*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Nixon_judicial_appointment_controversies)). 
    As I argued above, given the Senate’s foot-dragging on the
    nomination, Obama needed to energize the Democratic base by giving
    them a nominee who would fight for social justice in cases likely to
    come before the Court on issues such as worker rights, reproductive
    choice, racial justice, and overturning the Citizens
    United decision.  Instead, [*as legal scholar Jonathan H. Adler
    notes*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/volokh-conspiracy/wp/2016/03/16/initial-thoughts-on-president-obamas-decision-to-nominate-judge-merrick-garland-to-the-supreme-court/):

** **On the D.C. Circuit, Garland tends to write and join narrow
opinions that rarely break new ground. His decisions tend to hew closely
to applicable precedent and (where possible) avoid larger questions, and
are generally devoid of ideological thrusts or rhetorical flourish. .
.Garland also has a reputation for not being particularly sympathetic to
criminal defendants, at least as compared with other appellate judges
nominated by Democratic presidents.

This is truly a nominee Republican senators should love – in fact, back
when Obama nominated Sotomayor and Kagan, some of them were reported to
lament that [*Obama hadn’t nominated Garland
instead*](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/17/us/politics/obama-supreme-court-nominee.html?_r=1). 
Why should progressives leap to Garland’s defense?

** He is no friend of democracy for the District of Columbia –**
Advocates of full democratic rights for the District have no reason to
cheer Garland’s nomination, since during his current tenure on the Court
of Appeals he was involved in [*a
ruling*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2000/10/17/dc-loses-bid-for-vote-in-congress/cc3fd85a-abe9-459d-9648-45d1998e992c/)
that helped derail an attempt to achieve statehood or at least voting
representation in Congress – both of which DC, which is under the
legislative control of Congress, lacks. Garland, sitting as part of a
three-member panel, in 2000 co-authored a decision that rejected a pair
of lawsuits filed by DC residents for greater local rights.  One of the
suits would have required Congress to grant voting representation and
the other would have mandated either a path to statehood or union with
another state.  The third judge on the panel dissented with Garland’s
dismissal of the suits.  Even though the panel rejected the suits, they
issue was nevertheless referred to the Supreme Court for review since it
involved voting rights, but later that year the high court affirmed the
panel’s ruling without a hearing.

** **The nomination of Garland is another attempt by Obama to appease
his domestic opponents – a habit that has been the tragic flaw of his
presidency.  Instead of staking out a strong position and forcing the
opposition to come to him, Obama anticipates the other side’s objections
in advance and meets them more than halfway before negotiations have
even begun.  The Affordable Care Act was a case in point:  He could have
set forth a universal, affordable program such as a single-payer,
Medicare-for-All plan as he was urged to by progressives (including
Bernie Sanders) as a starting point for discussions.  Instead, he
anticipated Republican objections, and internalized them in proposing a
watered-down proposal inspired by the Massachusetts state healthcare
plan that even Mitt Romney supported.  Therefore, he started talks from
a weak bargaining point, and his already self-compromised plan was
further watered down by Congress, including the jettisoning of the
public option.

None of this is to imply that the Left should jump on an anti-Garland
bandwagon.  We should demand that the Senate respect the nominee of the
President and give him a fair hearing and a vote. To paraphrase Donald
Rumsfeld, we have to live with the nominee we have, not the one we
wished we had.  However, this cries out for an ongoing grassroots
movement to pressure the White House to select judicial nominees – not
only for the Supreme Court but all federal courts – who would bring to
the courts a greater regard for social justice as well as more racial
and gender diversity.  But for now, we can only wonder what might have
been.

[*TRUMP ON DC DEMOCRACY: NO TO STATEHOOD, MAYBE TO
REPRESENTATION*](http://dsadc.org/trump-on-dc-democracy-no-to-statehood-maybe-to-representation/)

Thursday, March 31st, 2016

 

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; April 2016**

*By Bill Mosley*

In last month’s *Washington Socialist*, [*I offered a
rundown*](http://dsadc.org/dc-home-rule-whats-the-position-of-the-presidential-candidates/)
on the views of the current candidates for President on DC home rule and
statehood.  The information was taken from the candidates’ public
statements or, for those who have served in Congress, their past votes
and positions on DC statehood, voting representation in Congress or
legislation impacting local autonomy.

In that article, I used Donald Trump’s rather vague responses to
questions put to him by Chuck Todd on *Meet the Press* to conclude that
he was open to considering statehood, although not necessarily endorsing
it.  But in his [*May 21 editorial board meeting with the *Washington
Post**](https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2016/03/21/a-transcript-of-donald-trumps-meeting-with-the-washington-post-editorial-board/),
Trump was asked by reporter Jo-Ann Armao about statehood and
congressional voting representation for the District.  “I don’t see
statehood for D.C.,” Trump said, adding that “having representation
would be okay.”

That makes it unanimous:  All of the Republican candidates oppose
statehood, although among them only Trump has expressed at even lukewarm
support for voting representation.  Meanwhile, both Democratic
candidates support it – at least we think they do; Hillary Clinton
supposedly confirmed her support privately to DC Delegate Eleanor Holmes
Norton but hasn’t announced it publicly.

If nothing else, we can be grateful that the *Post* remembered to ask
the question.
