***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from January 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the first 2015 issue of the Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-first-2015-issue-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Tuesday, January 13th, 2015

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

***Welcome to the first 2015 issue of the Washington Socialist*, the
email newsletter of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America. And Happy
New Year.**

As the year opens, progressive and left organizations like ours are
struggling as always, and the signs are more than just the appalling
carnage of the 2014 election in national and state politics. The lagging
recovery, only mildly helped along by the pusillanimous one-time
stimulus program, has left a widespread sour mood among those who did
not benefit from the corporate and Wall Street resurgence. Good politics
seldom emerge from the electorate under those circumstances, but… may
offer new openings for education. We can hope the new year will offer
those opportunities. And — you may have heard this before — nobody said
this would be easy…

Metro DC DSA’s January looks like this: Our **Jan. 10 membership
meeting** will hear from Debby Szeredy of the Postal Workers, who will
outline the privatization threat(s) they are fighting. The meeting is at
1 at the MLK main library, 901 G St. NW in room A9 downstairs. Szeredy,
the APWU’s executive vice-president, will speak first and questions
follow. The membership business meeting is 2-2:30. The monthly
**Socialist Salon** is the following Thursday, **Jan. 15** at 6:30 p.m.;
local activists will lead a discussion of the electoral and governance
prospects in the District and Maryland. It’s at Hunan Dynasty, 215
Pennsylvania Ave. SE. And a **Happy Hour** is planned for 6:30 p.m. on
Wednesday, **Jan. 28**. Get updates on all these events – and others –
on our [*Meetup
page*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=90c73a199a&e=003de9ccab).

**IN THIS ISSUE:**\
[*WELCOME TO
2015*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=342b4fcbea&e=003de9ccab):
The local deftly postponed its membership meeting Dec. 13 to participate
in the march against police violence on that day. Pictures illustrate
our solid turnout.

[*HOLIDAY GREETINGS AND NEW YEAR
THOUGHTS*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=63488156ec&e=003de9ccab):
If it sometimes seems as though every New Year brings a fresh stage of
struggle that’s both old and new – well, it appears to be true. Kurt
Stand focuses on why that can have a clarifying effect – maybe even
energizing when looked at the right way.

[*YEARLY REPORT: WHAT OUR LOCAL DID IN
2014*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=e517950e66&e=003de9ccab):
We always hope that “you are what you were” is going to be a strategic
advantage rather than a millstone, that our learning outpaces our
routines. Andy Feeney’s comprehensive and clear-eyed view of the Metro
DC DSA local’s activities during 2014 shows a surprising amount of work
that took place, as well as avenues for improvement.

[*CONGRESS VOTES TO BLOCK DC MARIJUANA INITIATIVE, BUT CITY VOWS TO
FIGHT BACK:
*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ee2ea6ebbf&e=003de9ccab)An
Eastern Shore (Maryland) Republican Congressman – with a history of
meddling in the District’s affairs to please the home folks – has done
it again. This time Andy Harris is trying to quash the D.C. initiative
on marijuana. It’s a hassle, but there are persuasive arguments that he
was too late on this one. Bill Mosley reads the tea leaves: Will this be
the insult that propels the Statehood movement to the next level?

[*SOCIALISM AND
RAPE*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=2df80d4ee4&e=003de9ccab):
The historical sociologist Orlando Patterson found that classical Greek
society – a patriarchy if there ever was one, as well as a classic slave
society – had a curious definition of freedom. Essentially, maximum
freedom was enjoyed by imposing one’s will on someone else. This
explains a lot. Carolyn Byerly outlines the development of
socialist-feminist responses to rape in recent decades and how it has
cultivated the national discourse.

[*SUSTAINABLE TECH
ENABLERS*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=779945f05b&e=003de9ccab):
As wind energy emerges as a main renewable source, other tech wizardry
enables it to be more reliable and, perhaps, to keep it from being
stifled by national security panics. Dan Adkins briefs us on Sustainable
Tech.

BOOKS/ARTS\
Two movies get a look from Dan Adkins: the hockey documentary [**Red
Army**](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=bf998d71fc&e=003de9ccab)
and the Hollywood version of Alan Turing, [**The Imitation
Game**](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=2d42100900&e=003de9ccab).

[*GOOD READS FOR
SOCIALISTS*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8666ac2be2&e=003de9ccab):
A year-end compendium of useful reads, radical and otherwise, you may
not have seen.

[*DISASTER CAPITALISM AND THE DISASTER OF
CAPITALISM*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=7e5883536d&e=003de9ccab):
Naomi Klein’s new book *This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the
Planet* is making waves for its subtitle. In a review, Woody Woodruff
says her account makes more sense taken with her 2007 book, *The *

*Shock Doctrine* – a cogent account of how today’s capitalism was
reengineered by some familiar forces to become hyper and globalized,
accelerating the ruin of the environment.

**You can read these and other past articles in the *Washington
Socialist* on our website where they are archived,**
[***dsadc.org***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=eefbbf567c&e=003de9ccab)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*CONGRESS VOTES TO BLOCK DC MARIJUANA INITIATIVE, BUT CITY VOWS TO
FIGHT
BACK*](http://dsadc.org/congress-votes-to-block-dc-marijuana-initiative-but-city-vows-to-fight-back/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

According to an ancient Kenyan saying, when two elephants fight it’s the
grass that suffers.  And in the recently concluded battle over federal
spending for 2015, it was an elephant fighting a donkey while, barely
visible to the combatants, democracy in the District of Columbia got
trampled – again.

The latest outrage against home rule was a rider in the spending bill,
inserted at the behest of Rep. Andy Harris (R-Md.) to block Initiative
71, approved by 70 percent of DC voters last November, which would
legalize marijuana in the District.  While the debate in Congress
featured salvos on banking, immigration and other national issues, few
on the Hill had anything to say about congressional micromanaging of a
local matter, even after DC activists staged a sit-in at the office of
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid.  There were exceptions, such as Sen.
Cory Booker (D-N.J.), who called the rider “an offense to Americans of
all states and Americans in the District of Columbia and all those who
believe in our cherished ideals.”  And Eleanor Holmes Norton, DC’s
non-voting delegate in House, protested the bill vigorously.  But few
votes were swayed over the DC provision, and the bill passed.

“Here we go again!” lamented Anise Jenkins, president and executive of
director of the Stand Up! for Democracy in DC Coalition, which conducts
educational activities in support of DC statehood.  “This is the second
time Rep. Andy Harris has tried to stop DC voters from deciding our own
laws on marijuana.  It is strange how he ‘forgets’ he is being paid to
represent the people who live in his district – Maryland’s Eastern Shore
— not to interfere with the rights of the people of the District of
Columbia!  Is it time to remind him?”

By now, residents of the District are getting used to Congress
interfering in local affairs, though no happier about it.  After DC
voters approved a measure in 1998 to allow marijuana for medical
purposes, Congress blocked its implementation for 10 years.  Past riders
have included a ban on local funding for needle exchange programs
designed to prevent the spread of HIV, which was lifted in 2007 but not
until after more than [*15,000 DC residents, or 3 percent of the
population, had contracted HIV – a rate as high as some West African
nations*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/03/14/AR2009031402176.html?sid=ST2009031402211). 
In 2011 President Obama acceded to a demand from Republicans to prohibit
the District from funding abortions for poor women, which sparked
protests that resulted in numerous DC residents, including Mayor Vincent
Gray, being arrested.

Why are certain members of Congress, almost always conservative
Republicans, so eager to micromanage DC affairs?  First, because they
can.  They have no such authority over their own states or any states,
but the Constitution gives Congress legislative authority over the
federal district.  This makes the DC budget part of the annual federal
appropriations morass, even though the majority of funds at issue are
raised through local taxes.  Secondly, the DC laws that have come into
their sights are generally measures favored by progressives.  The
marijuana initiative, for example, gained most traction locally as a
measure for racial justice, since African Americans bear the brunt of
enforcement of the drug laws although whites are about as likely to be
marijuana users, according to the [*DC Cannabis
Campaign.*](http://dcmj.org/) Therefore, conservative opposition to
marijuana legalization in the District not only allows politicians to
posture as being tough on drugs, it also allows them to engage in a
subtle form of “dog-whistle politics,” signaling to their mostly white
constituencies that they’re happy to keep sending black youths to prison
for minor drug infractions – all without overtly mentioning race.

The 2011 protest portended a less pliant District government, tired of
four decades of watered-down “home rule” in which elected officials have
been forced to govern with Congress looking over their shoulders.  In
2012, voters approved a DC Council-sponsored referendum in favor of
freeing the local budget from the federal appropriations process,
although the Gray administration, spurred by DC Attorney General Irving
Nathan’s legal objections, has been fighting the measure in court.

Then, in the wake of Congress’ interference in the marijuana initiative,
the posture of DC officials increasingly turned to one of defiance. 
Both DC Council Chair Phil Mendelson and Delegate Norton said the
District would move forward with legalization in the face of
congressional opposition.  Norton, for her part, said the language in
the appropriations bill barring the District from using any funding to
“enact” a reduction of drug laws is moot – the city had already
“enacted” the laws by voting for them in November.  Meanwhile, Mendelson
said he would send marijuana legalization to Congress for the standard
30-day review and force members to either let it pass or proactively
shoot it down, which could have the effect of further galvanizing the
movement for DC statehood.

“Ignoring the will of DC voters is an obvious intrusion on Home Rule.
Unfortunately, the Constitution gives Congress that power and once again
they are using it in a cynical and undemocratic way,” said U.S. Sen.
Michael D. Brown (D-DC).  “The strategy to submit Initiative 71 to
Congress should be pursued as an act of defiance but, in my opinion, it
will not work. ‘Exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever***’ ***is
absolute***.*** The only real remedy for our situation in the District
of Columbia is statehood. Only by becoming a state will we ever achieve
‘real’ home rule and become equal citizens of this democracy with the
right to self-determination.  Year after year we get attacked through
the budget process. It’s time to say enough is enough and stand up for
DC statehood.”  (While senators and representatives from DC do not have
votes in Congress, they act as elected lobbyists for DC statehood in
their respective chambers.)

So the battle over legalized marijuana continues as only the latest
front in the ongoing battle to free DC from congressional control. 
Given the continued penchant for congressional meddling, it’s becoming
clear that only DC statehood offers the full local autonomy that will
cease congressional micromanagement once and for all.  A statehood bill
introduced by Norton in the last session of Congress gained numerous
sponsors in both houses and a hearing in the Senate, but neither chamber
voted on it.  In the face of a more hostile Congress in the next
session, DC activists and elected officials will be looking for a way to
move the statehood struggle forward in 2015.

*For a historical perspective on resistance to congressional control of
the District of Columbia and the growth of the DC statehood movement,
see* [**my article in New Politics Magazine.
**](http://newpol.org/content/district-columbia-oldest-colony-51st-state)

[*DISASTER CAPITALISM AND THE DISASTER OF
CAPITALISM*](http://dsadc.org/disaster-capitalism-and-the-disaster-of-capitalism/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt; January 2015***

* By Woody Woodruff*

**A Review of Naomi Klein, *This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the
Planet* (2014) and *The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism*
(2007)**

** **It’s been a longtime, empirically grounded truth that when disaster
strikes, those with deep resources – the haves – weather it better than
the have-nots. Before unions, the only way workers could win in hard
times was to die. The population crash of the fourteenth-century Black
Death paradoxically began the modern era by forcing up the wages of
those in the diminished work force, shrinking the area of human
settlement and giving Eurasia a frontier.

Most of the time, though, it was the haves who not only survived the
catastrophe better but learned that the have-nots wound up even more
desperate and oppression-ready than usual.

The impending catastrophe of climate change is only the latest in which
capitalism and authoritarian politics are hooking up with plans to
emerge stronger after the crisis than before.

Naomi Klein’s *This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Planet* deals
expressly with the mortal threat of climate change. But it keys
perfectly with her 2007 book *The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster
Capitalism.* That work outlined a designed sequence toward domination in
the market-fundamentalist gospel of the University of Chicago’s Milton
Friedman and his disciples. Their quite amoral project involved imposing
economic shock treatment as part of right-wing government takeovers in
Chile, Argentina, Indonesia, post-Soviet Russia, US-occupied Iraq and
Afghanistan – and post-Katrina New Orleans and the post-9/11 US.

As a complete ecology of domination, though, this was coupled with shock
applied to dissident individuals and groups via “disappearance,” torture
and psychological coercion. Klein saw a continuity between the
malleability of peoples’ behavior when they were deliberately
destabilized in a psychological setting and the malleability of
societies in times of crisis and instability.

The renegade Canadian psychotherapist Ewen Cameron’s 1950s experiments
on destabilization of subjects, including the excessive use of then-new
electroshock techniques, drew the interest of CIA interrogation
specialists. It led to [*the collaboration of
psychotherapists*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/11/health/architects-of-cia-interrogation-drew-on-psychology-to-induce-helplessness.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&module=b-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&_r=1)
in Guantanamo’s horrors and the techniques used in Chile and Argentina
by brutal juntas, some later trained at the US military’s infamous
School of the Americas.  (*SD* 35-7)

The complement to these techniques was provided by Milton Friedman and
the Chicago Boys, always on the hunt for catastrophes that offered an
opening to introduce market fundamentalism in as pure a form as they
could. Klein has a caution for all here, though: “The ideologies that
long for that impossible clean slate, which can be reached only through
some kind of cataclysm, are the dangerous ones.” (*SD* 19)

Klein distinguishes, in *Shock Doctrine*, between market fundamentalism
and markets per se. Under many circumstances, “A free market in consumer
product can coexist with free public health care, with public schools,
with a large segment of the economy – like a national oil company – held
in state hands. It’s equally possible to require corporations to pay
decent wages, to respect the right of workers to form unions, and for
governments to tax and redistribute wealth so that the sharp
inequalities that mark the corporate state are reduced. Markets need not
be fundamentalist.” (*SD* 20)

But in the hands of the Chicago Boys, fundamentalism was the only
gospel. The three-point shock doctrine was a political coup, shock
therapy for a nonfundamentalist economy, and direct torture or
psychological behavior modification a la Ewen Cameron. By Klein’s
reading, these were natural allies and their different individual
devotees spoke the same language. “The shock of the coup prepared the
ground for economic shock therapy; the shock of the torture chamber
terrorized anyone thinking of standing in the way of the economic shock.
Out of this live laboratory emerged the first Chicago School state, and
the first victory \[Chile\] in its global counterrevolution.” (*SD* 71)

Friedman and the Chicago Boys saw as their specific enemy
“developmentalism,” a trend and national strategy particularly popular
in the Southern Cone (South America) in the 1950s and ‘60s.
Developmentalists engaged in state planning for industrial and
extractive development, and nationalization was frequently on the table
for the essential industries and enterprises: varying degrees of state
socialism. So market fundamentalism became “counterrevolutionary” and
was weaponized by US covert forces and corporate powers. “In this new
era, no one besides a handful of men in uniform needed to agree with
them.” (*SD* 78)

This three-pronged doctrine was spread by its success, the tacit or
active support of US administrations, and the incentive offered to
militaries throughout the Southern Cone to take care of their explicit
enemies in a pattern made more famous in this century by terrorist
paramilitaries. “By the mid-seventies, disappearances had become the
primary tool of the Chicago School juntas throughout the Southern Cone,”
with thirty thousand abductions in Argentina over the course of its
military rule. As the Chicago/Shock doctrine became routinized for use
in troublesome nations, Friedman formulated it succinctly: “Only a
crisis – actual or perceived – produces real change. When that crisis
occurs, the actions that are taken depend on the ideas that are lying
around.” The ideas that are “lying around” foremost in the public mind
must be kept “alive and available until the politically impossible
becomes politically inevitable.” Crises, Klein surmises, “are… democracy
free zones – gaps in politics as usual when the need for consent and
consensus do not seem to apply.” She believes Freidman and his cohorts
took a lesson from Keynes, whose ideas were salient and ready when the
Depression brought the crisis that made their implementation not only
possible but inevitable. (*SD* 140-41)

The Chicago takeover of the IMF and World Bank in the era of the
“Washington Consensus” – 1989-ca. 2000 – furthered the nonmilitary
quality of disaster capitalism. The two mega-institutions were ready to
provide capital under neoliberal conditions – low public services, high
exports, tight budgets – as nation after nation fell into financial
crisis at the hands of the rapid global mobility of capital.

The corruption of Deng Xiao-Ping’s capitalist road and the Yeltsin-Putin
regimes in post-1989 Russia, the African National Congress’s betrayal of
its own charter in the economic rules of the road imposed as the price
of power and self-government all showed the shock doctrine in
increasingly refined forms. But the formula remained: torture or similar
one-on-one terrorism, a return to market fundamentalism and a rejection
of democratic economic planning and suppression of popular support for a
people-first economy.

In 1993 economist John Williamson, coiner of the term “The Washington
Consensus,” told an international economics conference that “it could
conceivably make sense to think of deliberately provoking a crisis so as
to remove the political logjam to reform.” Deliberate crisis creation,
Klein says wonderingly, was now “being openly discussed.” (*SD* 256)

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="1.0729166666666667in"}

But reform was not the only object; increasingly, the virtue of crisis –
for Wall Street – was the increased access of US global capital to
national markets that had been closed. When the Asian Tigers fell into
recession in 1997, US industries and financiers snapped up huge family
enterprises – *chaebols* – in South Korea. In the span of 20 months
“there were 186 major mergers and acquisitions” in the SE Asian nations
whose economies had come under siege, and the *Wall Street Journal*
headlined “Wall Street Scavenging in Asia-Pacific.” Shock capitalism was
fundamentalizing the globe’s economy. (*SD* 273, 276)

The 9/11 attacks brought the shock doctrine recipe home to the US, and
Hurricane Katrina provides a close-up model of the “clean slate” concept
for refashioning usual democratic attitudes.  The privatization of
homeland security and then, in the Rumsfeld era, of the military put
more and more power in the hands of corporations and financialist
interests. Though she relates a fair number of instances of
corporate-government collusion and outright corrupt practices, Klein
argues that “stories about corruption and revolving doors leave a false
impression. They imply that there is still a clear line between the
state and the \[disaster capitalism\] complex, when in fact that line
disappeared long ago.” (*SD* 315) The imposition of a Chicago-flavored
constitution on Iraq’s puppet Bush government exemplified this
principle, once 9/11 had provided the disturbance that allowed homeland
security to take center stage in the market-fundamentalist project. In
Iraq “all the careful efforts during the nineties to present ‘free
trade’ as something other than an imperial project were abandoned.”
(*SD* 343), bringing what the *Economist* called the “wish-list that
foreign investors and donor agencies dream of for developing markets.”
(*SD* 345)

After any natural disaster, authoritarianism at least temporarily
becomes the go-to regime model for recovery. So disaster capitalism
worked wonderfully well (for the capitalist elite) when natural disaster
came to call. After the devastating tsunami of 2004, beachfront areas of
Sri Lanka were slickly appropriated from traditional fishing communities
and turned into tourist magnets. And Hurricane Katrina’s obliteration of
much of New Orleans offered (with the complaisant aid of the Bush
administration) huge opportunities for taking autonomy away from
longstanding black communities and even indulging one of Milton
Friedman’s pet projects, converting public schools to private.

The symmetry of Klein’s argument in *Shock Doctrine* can make the reader
suspicious – surely some other factors had a role in these nefarious
takeovers of national economies? But the frequent surface crises often
exhibit the economic underpinning that gained steadily through the
Reagan-Thatcher era, went bipartisan in the US through the Clinton years
and then went whole-hog Cheneyite and never looked back after 9/11.
Klein’s steady and credible reporting on this hidden pattern is
persuasive. And the pattern instilled a slightly different and quite
pernicious cultural strain of cronyism and opportunism in the US and the
global financial world that took its cues from the US: “Once you accept
that profit and greed as practiced on a mass scale create the greatest
possible benefits for any society, pretty much any act of personal
enrichment can be justified as a contribution to the great creative
cauldron of capitalism, generating wealth and spurring economic growth –
even if it’s only for yourself and your colleagues,” Klein says. (*SD*
235)  That steady shift in attitudes and practices, amounting to a
hegemonic tightening of the corporate grip on US political life, led to
the crisis that changes everything.

The ultimate, irreversible shock is represented by anthropogenic climate
change in *This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Planet.* Again,
as poor people and workers are back on their heels due to drought, food
insecurity, and constant disruption of their living situation
(especially the six hundred million living on vulnerable coastline),
it’s the corporate, moneyed few who can gain even more substantive
hegemony. Klein sees that as a severe, transnational threat, with the
global corporations already assembling their private armies to enforce
the two-tiered society of the climate future (as already envisioned by
Hollywood): elites in their bubble-like enclaves, and the helots
struggling in a hellish new environment. (*TCE* 9) Klein’s two books
considered here, published seven years apart, nevertheless dovetail
powerfully.

The lingering hegemonic power of market fundamentalism , Chicago-style,
has created the worst-case scenario for dealing with the crisis of
climate change. The growth-mad ideology of global capitalism, which
accelerates the destruction of the climate, is also the political
context in which that destruction must be contested. “Climate change …
landed on the public agenda at the peak of free-market, end-of-history
triumphalism, which was very bad timing indeed.” And “Market
fundamentalism has… systematically sabotaged our collective response to
climate change.” Later, more bluntly: “our economic system and our
planetary system are now at war.” (*TCE* 19, 21). Against that must
come, she insists, “a vision in which we collectively use the crisis to
leap somewhere that seems, frankly, better than where we are now.”
(*TCE* 7).

The unexpectedly rapid growth of emissions, shortening the timeline for
remedies, stems largely from economic growth in the emerging BRIC
(Brazil, Russia, India, China)  nations in recent decades and
illustrates “the spectacular success multinational corporations have had
in globalizing the high-consumption-based economic model pioneered in
wealthy Western countries.” (*TCE* 412)

At the Climate March in late 2014, DSA members and other left formations
marched in the section of that massive turnout labeled “We Know Who’s
Responsible.” Despite the cacophony of climate denial from the Right,
the responsible parties know damn well they are responsible, Klein
demonstrates. One of her best reporting techniques in both books is to
immerse herself in the forums and ceremonies of the confident and
powerful. Covering a meeting of the climate-denying Heartland
Foundation, she surmises “these hard-core ideologues understand the real
significance of climate change better than most of the ‘warmists’ in the
political center, the ones who are still insisting that the response can
be painless and gradual. … when it comes to the scope and depth of
change required to avert catastrophe, they are right on the money.”
(*TCE* 43)

“When climate change deniers claim that global warming is a plot to
redistribute wealth, it is not (only) because they are paranoid. It is
because they are paying attention,” Klein says. Caustically, she adds,
“their dominance-based worldview provides them with the intellectual
tools to write off huge swaths of humanity, and indeed to rationalize
profiting from the meltdown.” (T*CE* 48) And in respect to the wider
resistance to climate change (including among workers, some unionized)
she quotes Upton Sinclair: “It is difficult to get a man to understand
something, when his salary depends on his not understanding it.” (*TCE*
46) Other than the standard sniping at construction unions desperate for
the meagre job fallout from the Keystone XL Pipeline project, Klein has
regrettably little to say about workers, organized or not, as agents of
change in the climate battle. Many unions, especially in the Southern
Cone, were singled out in *Shock Doctrine* as victimized and destroyed
by the triple whammy of full-bore Chicago Boys shock treatment; in *This
Changes Everything* the focus shifts to other frontline communities.

Klein has not only displayed the usual suspects in climate aggravation –
deep sea oil spills, extraction regimes from fracking to minerals and
tar sands exploitation – but she has reported on site from some of them.
A Canadian, she gives special attention to the Alberta tar sands
monstrosity and the First Nations peoples whose lands it is despoiling.
The pan-tribal organization Idle No More is fighting energy exploitation
throughout the country and providing a model for what Klein hopes will
be the seedbed of a worldwide push-back against Big Energy. “Resistance
to high-risk extreme extraction is building a global, grassroots and
broad-based network the likes of which the environmental movement has
rarely seen.” She calls it (as do others) “Blockadia,” a “roving
transnational conflict,” and confers nationhood on it. (*TCE* 294-5)

Klein seems to calculate that desperation overcomes inertia among
frontline communities – in part because their grievance is tied to their
ancestral land –  and that will cause the “mass jailbreak from the house
that their \[corporate-capitalist\] ideology built” (*TCE* 63)

But for the middle class that is the core (or potential core) of climate
activism,

“What if part of the reason we have failed to act is not because we are
too selfish to care about an abstract or seemingly far-off problem –but
because we are utterly overwhelmed by how much we do care.” (*TCE* 461)

Here she touches on, but does not explore, the well-developed theory of
“threat communication” and its degrees. When a looming threat is
detailed in news or propaganda, it won’t elicit action unless it falls
into a perceived comfort zone: This is something I could do something
about. If the threat is too low or too far away, no response will be
triggered. If the threat appears overwhelming, exceeds perceived
opportunities for activist agency, the message recipient likely will
shut down and change the subject mentally. This is a critical problem
for environmentalists of the left, who must couple the increasingly
unpleasant science of climate change with the very difficult politics of
remedying it.

Where Klein could envision well-regulated, democratic market society as
a reasonable alternative to the Chicago gospel in *Shock Doctrine*, she
is gloomier in *This Changes Everything* about the prospects of a
democratic-electoral base for change because the hour is so late and so
many opportunities have been lost. High-friction change in lifestyles
and jobs, she asserts early in the book, will include a big role for
authority, expert or not:

“There are legitimate fears too of what some call ‘green fascism’ – an
environmental crisis so severe that it becomes the pretext for
authoritarian forces to seize control in the name of restoring some kind
of climate order.” (*TCE* 54)

But to balance that she concludes

…in the hot and stormy future we have already made inevitable through
our past emissions, an unshakeable belief in the equal rights of all
people and a capacity for deep compassion will be the only things
standing between civilization and barbarism. (*TCE* 462)

“…there is still time to avert catastrophic warming,” Klein asserts,
“but not within the rules of capitalism as it is currently constructed,”
an “economic system that fetishizes GDP growth above everything else.”
(*TCE* 88) The current growth imperative and the level of waste and
overconsumption that it demands, she says, give us an exaggerated notion
of the actual lifestyle changes that managing climate change demands in
its turn.

Does she have specific solutions, though? Klein’s gloomy scenario
requires resources for the reversal, and she proposes taxes on financial
transactions, on the fossil fuel companies (“before they are
significantly less profitable”), via a carbon tax and ending subsidies,
and significant cutbacks in military spending in all nations. She
synthesizes some polls deftly to show that public opinion would embrace
taxes that run counter to “our culture of lopsided sacrifice” in which
corporations skate the consequences of their own greed. And she neatly
equates fossil fuel companies to tobacco companies, eventually to shift
in the public eye from pillars of commerce to providers of poison, so
that finally there can be “a serious discussion about whether those
\[fossil fuel\] profits are so illegitimate that they deserve to be
appropriated and reinvested in solutions to the climate crisis.” (*TCE*
355)

Economic clout can undermine law, though, of course. The failures of the
promises made at abolition are examples. “The fact that our most heroic
social justice movements won on the legal front but suffered big losses
on the economic front is precisely why our world is as fundamentally
unequal and unfair as it remains.” (*TCE* 455-458)

But Klein’s imperative for lower growth in a framework of class equity
is vulnerable to Elizabeth Kolbert’s critique (*New York Review of
Books*, Dec. 4, 2014, 14-16): Klein “floats the ‘managed degrowth’
concept … but… how this plays out she leaves unexplored” and “she
vaguely tells us that we have to consume less, but not how much less, or
what we’ll have to give up.” Kolbert herself acknowledges that if those
burdened with first-world problems are actually informed what sacrifices
are necessary, they turn to another subject.

Planning – industrial policy, “picking winners” – can make great strides
against climate catastrophe, as Klein points out in the case of Germany.
The planning required for combating climate change, Klein points out, is
radically different from the centralized planning and mega-projects
beloved of Eastern European governments during the Cold War or the World
Bank and IMF of the “Washington Consensus” heyday. Instead,
decentralization of energy production to the level of the residential
rooftop solar installation gets most traction against emissions. The
point here, a socialist reader might observe, is not to devolve the
responsibility to the individual; the society manages for equity and the
individual receives the programmatic benefits.

For a writer who is sometimes optimistic about our ability to slow and
compensate for climate change, Klein shows a remarkable affinity with
the skeptics of expert authority and climate science, scoffing at an
international conference brainstorming how to “hack the planet” with
technological solutions to “suck the carbon out of the atmosphere.”
Certainly some of those engaged in these pursuits are moonshine
peddlers, but the techno-optimists may be pointing toward solutions that
would undermine Klein’s reliance on stringent “de-growth” as a solution.
Readers of Annalee Newitz’s clever and well-reported book [**Scatter,
Adapt and Remember: How Humans Will Survive a Mass Extinction (Anchor,
2013)**](http://www.npr.org/2013/06/07/189520183/how-to-survive-a-mass-extinction)
get a more measured view of how current and future technology might make
a difference.

Lester Brown has, likewise, converged both technology and political
change for many years in programmatic books like [**Plan B 4.0:
Mobilizing to Save
Civilization.**](http://www.earth-policy.org/index.php?/books/pb4)
(WorldWatch 2009). In sequence, his model envisions 1.Stabilizing
Population; 2. Eradicating Poverty; 3. Restoring the Earth’s Natural
Support

Systems; 4. Stabilizing Climate. So the political comes first, not later
or as an afterthought.

Klein argues that the imperatives of fighting climate change and
preserving a planet that can support humans will bring about the
political changes that are necessary – a difficult argument to make,
though not unlike Lester Brown’s. The race between some form of
socialism or the barbarism of a world of climate refugees and snugged-up
elites all points to what Klein asserts is a threshold human event, but
also is characteristic of the too-inspirational and less-analytical
moments that mar her otherwise well-reported argument:

…the climate moment offers an overarching narrative in which everything
from the fight for good jobs to justice for migrants to reparations for
historical wrongs like slavery and colonialism can all become part of
the grand project of building a nontoxic, shockproof economy before it’s
too late. (*TCE* 154)

Later, she adds:

So climate change does not need some shiny new movement… . Climate
change can be the force – the grand push – that will bring together all
of these still living movements. (*TCE* 459)

And it will not be easy: the boat will be under renovation as the storm
reaches its peak. “There may have been a time when engaging in
resistance against a life-threatening system and building alternatives
to that system could be meaningfully separated, but today we have to do
both simultaneously…” (*TCE 405)*

As socialists, we have to be skeptical about what seems here to be
magical thinking. Klein acknowledges the mass of well-financed
disinformation surrounding the climate change question. But she seems to
discount the social inertia that capitalism imposes through fear and the
all-too-human resistance to news of future danger beyond the now – the
real disabling of the individual and collective will to agency that is
built into capitalist social practice. Those factors – which we
socialists credit ourselves with understanding, and educating and
agitating against – are the real danger to a resolute attack on climate
change. Workers and their unions must be critical allies, and take on
the fight because their old enemies the bosses are also the ones
devaluing any pay or benefits raise they win at the bargaining table by
wrecking the planet on which they make their living. Klein is clear that
alternative energy requires new kinds of job skills but does not dwell
on how those will be imparted – or demanded.

Naomi Klein has made a valuable contribution in these two books to
detailing the role of capitalism – especially the market fundamentalism
that is so hard to expunge – in promoting authoritarian regimes and
inequality, as well as in generating the carbon poison that has already
propelled us irreversibly into the era of anthropogenic climate change.
She convincingly demonstrates that a growth-fueled economy is
incompatible, and inimical, to a sustainable world. She has made it
clear that the corporate powers of Big Energy and the free-market snake
oil specialists will fight back – hard – and that existing governments
are joined to them at the hip, with separation a monumental task. The
fundamentalists have the advantage, and their theories have been (as
Friedman put it) “lying around” ready to go to work whenever catastrophe
occurred. The correctives for both a planetary civilization of
inequality and a planetary disaster are, as she says, equally conjoined
in concept, but the practical chore of keeping them in harness going
forward will require a more intricate struggle than she has portrayed.

[*Film: The Imitation Game*](http://dsadc.org/film-the-imitation-game/)
AND [*A Russian Hockey Film: The Red
Army*](http://dsadc.org/a-russian-hockey-film-the-red-army/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2015**

** ***By Daniel C. Adkins*

The film *The Imitation Game* chronicles key parts of Alan Turing’s life
associated with the birth of digital computing, and the breaking of
Enigma, a cryptologic method used by the Nazis to transmit strategic
intelligence codes in World War II.  It also deals with
institutionalized prejudice against gays, nerds, and women during this
period in British history and how bypassing those prejudices helped win
the war.

The subject matter is the brilliant life and work of Alan Turing and the
English code breakers of Bletchley Park. The film has a true emotional
core of those difficult times, although it did not adhere exactly to
historical realities.  It was well acted, and supported by relevant
historical footage and CGI animation.  One of the core storylines was
how people think and how different mental modes can be used to create
useful and needed ideas that benefit us all.  This storyline was
reinforced throughout the film.  One historical point that was hinted at
was Alan Turing’s brain decline due to his choice of chemical castration
over imprisonment, after he was exposed as homosexual and convicted
under obscenity laws.  He was shown not being able to do a simple
crossword puzzle.  His brain’s decline might have been a major
contributing factor in his suicide a year later at age 41, as he was not
able to continue his work, which was a major driving force in his life.

The film claims that breaking the German code shortened the war by at
least two years.  This could be debated since in the beginning of the
war **Ultra**, the code word for the intelligence source, was not
decisive because the allies did not have the forces to stop the Germans
anyway.  It can be argued that the reason Hitler lost was that he vastly
underestimated the productive capacity of the U.S., Russia, and
Britain.  This underestimating probably had more to do with his racist
ideology interfering with Germans’ predictive skills.

The story of how **Ultra** was used is fascinating, but was only used as
a backdrop.  The film showed the code breaker group making the agonizing
decision to not tell an allied convoy’ commanders they were about to be
attacked, because it would not help the war effort if the Germans knew
that the Enigma Code had been broken. Yet **Ultra** intercepts were used
to reroute convoys.  What did happen in WWII was that the British city
of Coventry was not warned when **Ultra** intercepted the plan to bomb
it.  It was deemed that the Germans would realize their codes were
broken.  The history purist may be slightly disappointed because the
historical reality is so fascinating, but the medium of film is not able
to tell an extensive tale, but can convey an emotional reality.

A trailer for the film can be found at:
[*http://trailers.apple.com/trailers/weinstein/theimitationgame/*](http://trailers.apple.com/trailers/weinstein/theimitationgame/)

 

[*A Russian Hockey Film: The Red
Army*](http://dsadc.org/a-russian-hockey-film-the-red-army/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2015**

*By Daniel C. Adkins*

The documentary *Red Army* is about the Russian hockey teams from the
‘70S or ‘80s to the present.  It is appropriately called *Red Army*
because all team members were officers in the real Red Army during
Soviet times.  The sole duties of these officers were to train and play
hockey for eleven months of the year.  The training was grueling, but
also imaginative.  The film follows team captain Slava Fetisov from team
member, team captain, national hero, to political enemy.

The label “Red Army” has many meanings to Americans.  It might mean the
Russian revolutionaries as shown in the film *Doctor Zhivago*.  For
those familiar with World War II, the Red Army was the army that
primarily defeated Hitler, while suffering millions killed and captured.
Over 24 million Russian troops were killed or captured by the Germans.
Others will remember the Red Army as occupying Eastern Europe and
putting down rebellions.

The concept of sacrifice is a major part of Russian military history
that carries over to its sport culture. What comes out in the film is
that sport training was so intense that it marginalized the players’
personal lives.  The idea that winning was so important that the use of
the most authoritarian means was justified also echoes the Red Army
history.

An intriguing aspect to Soviet/Russian Hockey was that the playing style
is very creative and cooperative.  The main idea was to control the puck
by continually passing the puck.  The North Americans, instead, play a
very individualistic and brutal form where individuals are valued for
taking shots and scoring.  The North American players were generally
larger then the Russians and played a rougher game.  The Soviets tried
to win Olympic medals across the board, which meant that Russian hockey
players were not the first pick among national athletes, or as large as
many opponents.  The Russian teams played a fluid game emphasized
teamwork and passing partly compensating for the size difference. The
Russians had to think differently to win.  To this end, chess champions
sometimes coached Russian players.  This might have been influenced by
collective ideology or that Russia has always had a significant
intellectual history and culture.  One example is that a Russian
mathematician first identified the math behind U.S. stealth technology. 
The film has a surprise ending in that the team captain becomes a rebel
and then evolves.

*The IMDB website says RED ARMY will be in theaters in late January
2015*

[*GOOD READS*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-2/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS JANUARY 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2015**

A tough critique of capitalist assimilation of many environmental
movements as represented by the “Big Green” national environmental
movements. Scott Parkin in *Counterpunch* says major environmental
groups can be as dangerous as Big Carbon in their way.
[*http://www.counterpunch.org/2014/12/02/between-empire-and-its-subjects/*](http://www.counterpunch.org/2014/12/02/between-empire-and-its-subjects/)

The reliably progressive Tom Edsall poses political questions about the
Democrats’ posture and its rep with the electorate. The focus is on the
drag the ACA puts on party fortunes; the surprise is that Schumer, the
senator from Wall Street, actually suggested prosecuting some bankers to
gain the faith of the middle class…
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/03/opinion/is-obamacare-destroying-the-democratic-party.html?ref=opinion*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/03/opinion/is-obamacare-destroying-the-democratic-party.html?ref=opinion)

Brentin Mock, who writes the “Read, Black and Green” blog for the
eco-radical publication Grist, explores how environmentalists find their
way to rationally supporting the “Black Lives Matter” project.  One
anti-fracking campaigner who works in poor, white Appalachia told him
“At the end of the day, the same corporate interests that are behind
these private prisons and mass incarceration are also behind poisoning
our air and water.”

[*http://grist.org/climate-energy/how-to-set-aside-your-anxieties-and-join-the-black-lives-matter-movement/?utm\_source=newsletter&utm\_medium=email&utm\_term=Weekly%2520Dec%252016&utm\_campaign=weekly*](http://grist.org/climate-energy/how-to-set-aside-your-anxieties-and-join-the-black-lives-matter-movement/?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_term=Weekly%2520Dec%252016&utm_campaign=weekly)

Patricia Williams, critical legal scholar and author of *The Rooster’s
Egg* and other books, talks about the rejection of expert authority and
intellectual enterprise in the US in this *Guardian* piece:
[*http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/18/anti-intellectualism-us-book-banning?CMP=ema\_565*](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/18/anti-intellectualism-us-book-banning?CMP=ema_565)

Lane Kenworthy’s 2014 book *Social Democratic America* argues for a
Nordic-style variety of politics as appropriate for the US – a vision
that might have seemed close at hand after World War II but seems a bit
of a reach today. Rich Yeselson in *Dissent* finds it a compelling goal
in a review that also appeared on *Portside*.
https://mail.google.com/mail/u/1/?tab=wm\#inbox/14aa3173186f07a2

Here’s a take on socialism’s practice for today and tomorrow – not
yesterday, he says – by Sam Webb, national chair of CPUSA from 2000 to
2014. It’s from *People’s World*, a CPUSA site. Andy Feeney says “it’s
really interesting to see what Webb is saying about the impossibility of
building socialism in the U.S. by “looking in the rearview mirror.”
Click on Webb’s byline to see his brief bio.

[*http://peoplesworld.org/a-season-s-reflections-on-socialism/*](http://peoplesworld.org/a-season-s-reflections-on-socialism/)

From *The Nation* via *Portside*… John Nichols on helping defend the
postal service and its unions from the privatization assault by Congress
and the neocons. Suggested by Kurt Stand.\
[*http://portside.org/2014-12-23/thank-postal-workers-fighting-save-postal-service*](http://portside.org/2014-12-23/thank-postal-workers-fighting-save-postal-service)

[*Holiday Greetings and New Year
Thoughts*](http://dsadc.org/holiday-greetings-and-new-year-thoughts/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2015**

*By Kurt Stand*

    “ … I am lying here on a stone-hard mattress in a dark cell, around
me the usual quiet of a cemetery; one imagines oneself in the grave. 
From the window, the reflection of the lantern – which burns all night
in front of the prison – is drawn on the ceiling.  From time to time,
one hears, quite muffled, the distant rattling of a passing train or,
from nearby under the window, a sentinel clearing his throat; he is
slowly taking a few steps in his heavy boots in order to move his stiff
legs.  The sand rustles so hopelessly beneath his steps that the whole
desolation and inescapability of existence rises from it into the damp,
dark night.

“There I lie, quite alone, wrapped in those manifold black scarves of
darkness, boredom, confinement, and winter – and at the same time, my
heart burns with an incomprehensible, unknown inner happiness, as if I
were walking over a blooming field in radiant sunshine.  And I smile at
life in the darkness as I were aware of some magical secret which might
confute the lies, the baseness and the sadness and transform them into
sheer brightness and felicity.” (Letter written by Rosa Luxemburg to
Sonja Liebknecht in mid-December 1917)

 

In prison the coming of Christmas, of the holiday season, is often a
time of tension for it is a time when distance from family, from loved
ones, is felt most keenly.  On the other hand, the New Year is greeted
more warmly; if nothing else each year done marks one less to do and
often there is a momentary feeling of hope in an environment where such
is otherwise in short supply.  Something similar is frequently
experienced in the world far beyond prison walls — the tension of
shopping, of travel, of budgeting, of work, of managing expectations,
boil up in the weeks prior to Christmas.  Then comes the celebration,
the fellowship and cheer followed quickly by New Year’s Day with its
resolutions, plans and hopes.  Reality soon sets in, but the fleeting
glimpse of getting from “here” to an individually glimpsed “there,” is
real too.  Though we don’t each feel that way every turn of the page, it
is common enough, and has been going back through the ages.  Virtually
every culture, every religion has some sort of celebration marking the
change of year, marking winter solstice, which combines the fear of
fallow crops and anticipation of rebirth and new growth.

That balance is a way to look at developments within our society in our
own present.  Certainly much has taken place that is cause for anger, if
not despair.  The police killings of African Americans in Ferguson,
Cleveland, Staten Island, are signs of the violence that is too present
in our society, violence which is too often countenanced with the
impunity given to those who kill in an “official” capacity.  The tragic
assassination-style shooting of two police officers in New York on
December 21 doesn’t invalidate the truth of the injustice of racism and
inequality; rather, it only underscores the need for systemic changes
that ensure the promise of equality and “justice for all.”

So too, the revelations about rape at the University of Virginia –
revelations that speak the truth notwithstanding the weakness of the
*Rolling Stone* article that initially reported on it – because it
speaks of a violence ingrained in everyday life and so accepted by too
many as “normal,” even by youth such as those in Steubenville,
Pennsylvania for whom rape was something that could be boasted about on
social media.  Violence of a sort that is normalized because it
reproduces divisions of privilege and oppression that divide and
redivide our society – and is then replicated in the violence our
society engages abroad through what has become a state of permanent
war.  The seemingly unending parade of suicides by those who do the
fighting provides a glimpse of the impact of our wars on those who fight
them; no glimpse is allowed of the impact on the countries we invade
where such costs are immeasurably worse.

Of course, the Senate report on torture does provide such a view to
those willing to open their eyes; although reports without action means
that those culpable, those who give the orders, don’t face
consequences.  Once again, the impunity of privilege raises its ugly
head.   All this in an “improving” economy which hasn’t slowed
inequality, has failed to stem the growth of poverty, and which has done
little or nothing to overcome the insecurity felt by the vast majority
of the 99%.  Labor union strength continues to wane relative to
corporate executives who accept no limits on power and profit. 
Conditions that speak to the need for progressive change, for radical
change, yet conditions which instead saw reaction triumph in November’s
national elections, elections which offered little prospect for needed
substantive changes in Washington DC, suburban Maryland or Northern
Virginia.

Yet hope finds firm ground to stand upon in the coming year.  The
massive national climate change march a few months ago signaled the
depth of awareness of the dangers environmental destruction poses that
no amount of corporate money can hide; the ban on fracking in New York
state is a reflection of the success that can be attained when people
continue to agitate, educate, organize (as the IWW once preached and
practiced).  The massive outpouring of protests against police violence
and racial injustice in the wake of the above mentioned killings
contains the promise and possibility of more substantive change, just as
the strikes and protests at fast food outlets, at Walmarts, at
restaurants show that working-class action continues even with labor
under attack – while minimum wage and sick leave gains across the
country as well as locally are signs that victories can be won.  And not
just local victories. Obama’s announcement of immigration reforms is a
step forward for millions, notwithstanding all the remaining limitations
on the rights of the undocumented.  And the normalization of relations
with Cuba, the release of the last three of the Cuba 5 from prison is an
enormous victory in the name of peace, as well as being a simple step of
human decency.   Behind the President’s actions lay the work of
individuals, the strength of movements, that refused to give up and
which will continue to push for a world of greater justice.  Cause
indeed to welcome the New Year.

So too for us in Metro DC DSA.  We remain smaller and narrower than we
should be, just as does our entire national organization and all
organizations with socialist goals.  Yet it is also true that those
limitations were not barriers to increased activity last year, activity
that gives us the potential to grow in numbers, in diversity and in
rootedness, activity that itself exemplifies agitation, education and
organization.  Building our socialist presence locally is mirrored by
DSA nationally.  On-line meetings to analyze the relevance of Antonio
Gramsci’s writings to current challenges facing socialist organizations
provided one forum to air opinions amongst active members.  So too did
similar strategy meetings that allowed members from across the country
to engage in a process to refine and further develop DSA’s perspective. 
Such discussions are signs of growth, a growth that is not taking place
in a vacuum.  Rather, it is part of an upsurge that may strengthen the
presence of a socialist movement more broadly within the US.  The DSA
National Convention planned for 2015 will be a time to take stock and
move forward by moving against the grain.

By looking for the next place to take a step is how we can both see, and
see beyond, the disheartening and dispiriting news reports which greet
us most days.  However much power is still held tightly by corporate
power while political initiative remains in most instances with
reaction, opposition and alternatives grow beneath the surface and come
up for light when nurtured and fed with the values of the world that
could be.   Thus, it is right to welcome in the New Year no matter the
harshness of winter, no matter the harshness of our own or others
current circumstances because it is out of the tragedies of the present
that we can forge a better future – so long as we remember all sides of
the world in which we live.

    “Pessimism is cowardice.  The man who cannot frankly acknowledge the
‘Jim-Crow’ car as a fact and yet live and hope is simply afraid either
of himself or of the world.  There is not in the world a more
disgraceful denial of human brotherhood than the ‘Jim-Crow’ car of the
southern United States; but, too, just as true, there is nothing more
beautiful in the universe than sunset and moonlight on Montego Bay in
far Jamaica.  And both things are true and both belong to this our
world, and neither can be denied.”  (W.E.B. DuBois***, Darkwater***,
1920).

 

Aspirations and fears, be they in 1917 and 1920, be they in 2014 or
occur in 2015, are parts of the whole within which we live and create. 
Let us work in the days and years to come to give greater reality to the
happiness and beauty that Luxemburg and DuBois and so many others saw
and sought and so give content to a collective wish for a Happy New
Year, to a world of peace and good will.

[*Socialism and Rape*](http://dsadc.org/socialism-and-rape/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2015**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

\[W\]e made a political analysis of the crimes against women, not only
the most brutal forms like rape but the lesser forms of harassment like
pinching, showing how they fit into the general sexist structure of
society. Women can really understand and identify with this analysis.

Pat Galligan (in *Feminism and Socialism*, 1972)

 Rape was seen as a way to remind women that men were the dominant
gender. Rape was viewed as a form of oppression that was used by men to
keep women in their place in society. In this sense, society felt that
women, not men, were responsible for their rape. The socialist feminist
wanted to change the perspective that rape was not a crime against
women.

Laura Kramer (in *The Sociology of Gender*, 2011)

 Rape keeps insinuating itself into our reality, this time by way of a
*Rolling Stone* article
([*http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/features/a-rape-on-campus-20141119*](http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/features/a-rape-on-campus-20141119))
and the aftermath it has caused at University of Virginia.

Once the November article appeared, UVA President Teresa Sullivan moved
swiftly into action and addressed the fraternity culture blamed for the
alleged gang-rape of the woman “Jackie” central to the magazine
article.  She suspended fraternities for the remainder of the school
year and called on local police to investigate rape allegations,
including the one involving Jackie
([*http://www.cnn.com/2014/11/22/us/university-of-virginia-sexual-assault-allegations/*](http://www.cnn.com/2014/11/22/us/university-of-virginia-sexual-assault-allegations/)).

But all was not well in the newsroom.  As allegations of inconsistencies
in Jackie’s story surfaced, the *Rolling Stone* editors wisely turned
the investigation of its journalistic process over to Columbia
Journalism School, requesting a report of where their reporting and
editing failed
([*http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/erik-wemple/wp/2014/12/22/rolling-stone-farms-out-review-of-u-va-rape-story-to-columbia-journalism-school/*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/erik-wemple/wp/2014/12/22/rolling-stone-farms-out-review-of-u-va-rape-story-to-columbia-journalism-school/)). 
The president of the UVA’s Interfraternity Council has said that
fraternities should continue their efforts to reform their system and to
work with the university to stop sexual violence on campus
([*www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/u-va-remains-resolved-to-address-sexual-violence-as-rolling-stone-account-unravels/2014/12/06/66c0c780-7d64-11e4-84d4-7c896b90abdc\_story.html*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/u-va-remains-resolved-to-address-sexual-violence-as-rolling-stone-account-unravels/2014/12/06/66c0c780-7d64-11e4-84d4-7c896b90abdc_story.html)).

The UVA story will go on a while and then die down at some point as all
high-profile rape cases do, but the incidence and fact of rape will not,
and its evolution as a central political issue of modern times compels
us consider how socialists have weighed in on it over time.

Rape and its sister problem battering have been the anchor issues of
feminism for half a century. Women began to rise up angrily against
these widespread, largely unrecognized and certainly unpunished crimes
in the early 1970s.  New York Radical Feminists held a widely publicized
public “speak out” on rape in 1971, and soon women across the country
were staging similar events.  The anti-rape movement built quickly, with
women protesting police treatment of rape victims and the failure of
prosecutors to prosecute accused rapists.  Rape crisis centers formed,
composed of volunteers who listened to women’s stories and accompanied
victims to police stations to report.  Members of rape crisis groups had
expanded their work by the late 1970s to include preventative
educational programs in schools and trainings for police and prosecutors
on how to work with victims.  In large cities first, and then smaller
communities, feminists instigated the formation of “special victim
units” within police departments, and the placement of “legal advocates”
in prosecutors’ offices.  State level networks grew across the country
and by 1979, the National Coalition Against Sexual Assault formed and
began holding annual conferences.  Women would never again be silent
about their assaults, and they had stopped letting men get away with it.

One structural problem facing women of that period was antiquated rape
laws, which defined rape in ways inconsistent with women’s assault
experiences and thereby made it more difficult for prosecutors to build
a case.  Neither were women likely to report their assaults, fearing
that no one would believe them and that they would be stigmatized, both
by the criminal justice system and among those close to them.  The legal
situation motivated the liberal feminist group National Organization for
Women’s legal team to organize a state-by-state rape-law reform campaign
in 1974.  NOW leaders used sophisticated media information and educated
reporters to broaden public discourse, something that paid off with
increased (and better informed) reporting.  News stories began to
incorporate new feminist terminology – sexual assault, violence against
women, acquaintance rape, sexual harassment, etc. – and to carry a
feminist analysis often in the voices of rape movement leaders and rape
survivors.  Statutes were indeed revised in one state after another.

The most far-reaching feminist analysis of the problem came from
socialist feminists who situated violence against women at the
intersection of patriarchy and capitalism.  Sociologist Laura Kramer
states that “under patriarchy, women were viewed simply as the property
of men and not as individuals in society.”  Therefore, socialist
feminists reasoned, when it came to the issue of rape, men felt that
women were simply subordinates who had no rights of their own. For men,
rape did not exist.  While socialist feminists viewed rape as a form of
oppression that was used by men to keep women in their place in society,
they struggled at first to find its more specific connections to
capitalism.

Most male Marxists and socialists had been silent on whether and how
class and sexual oppression coincided.  Those few sources that did –
e.g., Engels’ *Origins if the Family, Private Property and the State*,
Trotsky’s statements about women in *Problems of Life,* *The Revolution
Betrayed*, and eventually *Women and the Family* – were all focused on
women’s subordination within the family unit.  None addressed sexual
violence.  Socialist feminists of the 1970s thought in bigger terms than
their male comrades about women in society and questioned the ways that
sexual violence (and women’s fear of it) extended into other
institutions, like the workplace, education and political life.

Socialist feminists saw women as exploited not only at home (through
labor and nurturance associated with the reproduction of the species),
but as lower-waged, less powerful laborers in the workplace, and as
absent from legislative bodies where public policies were adopted.  Rape
and other forms of sexual violence figured into the dynamics underlying
these forms of subordination, and, because of that.  And, according to
Marxist political theorist Nancy Hartsock, “we are dealing with a
gendered power of relations based in what our culture has defined as
sexuality . . . which must be understood to express the experience of
the ruling gender.”  In language reminiscent of Marx and Engels in *The
German Ideology*, Hartsock argued that the

ideas of the ruling class express the dominant material relations for
other classes, so too we can expect that because of masculine cultural
hegemony, these sexual dynamics typify some women . . and correspond to
men’s rather than women’s experience.

Hartsock’s theory of feminist historical materialism remains one of the
clearest expressions of how capitalism and patriarchy work together to
suppress women’s power.  The masculine cultural hegemony that Hartsock
referred to was enacted not only through men’s outright coercion (sexual
assault and implied threats) but women’s efforts to conform to masculine
expectations to better assure their safety and well- being.

Socialist feminists helped to bring to light to the social problems
associated with rape, factoring in race and sexual orientation. In their
analysis of the problem, men and women were divided in society, with
white men being seen as the most dominant. All feminists – socialist as
well as those from other philosophical positions – fought to have rape
recognized as a crime, as a way to alleviate the major differences
between men and women.

The more complex articulations of rape by socialist feminists remain
with us today, but are little spoken about in public discourse,
particularly in rape stories carried in the mainstream corporate media. 
Indeed, feminist voices of any stripe are less heard from today than in
the earlier days of the movement, even as one rape scandal after another
has emerged to consume the public imagination.  This would be a perfect
segue into a feminist political economic analysis of today’s
conglomerated news industry, but that is a topic for another commentary.

A better place to end would be to make several observations.  The first
is that the anti-rape movement, which began in the early 1970s, has been
an international movement, largely led by radical and socialist
feminists who have seen the inseparable connections between gender and
class oppression.  The second is that this movement has produced
measurable results in most countries in the form a new language and
analysis of rape, in the reform and/or adoption of new laws, and in
changes in gender relations.  In the last of these, it is important to
recognize women’s important male allies, many of whom truly get it and
feel compelled to speak up and work to stop sexual violence, and to
create more egalitarian relations with women, both those whom they love
and those they interact with in other capacities.  This dialectical
process has been slow but productive, and continues to demand the
leadership of socialists who understand that women remain the majority
of the victims of men’s violence as well as the poorest members of
capitalist societies.

 

**Sources:**

The author drew from a number of sources, including *Feminism and
Socialism* (Pathfinder Press, 1972); Nancy C. M. Hartsock’s *Money, Sex
and Power* (Northeastern University Press, 1985); Laura Kramer, *The
Sociology of Gender* (Oxford University Press, 2011, also at
[*http://212906806124441495.weebly.com/*](http://212906806124441495.weebly.com/));
Ruth Rosen, *The World Split Open* (Penguin Books, 2000); and Carolyn M.
Byerly and Marcus Hill, “Reformulation Theory: Gauging Feminist Impact
on News of Violence Against Women, *Journal of Women and Gender*
([www.academia.edu/2247510/Reformulation\_Theory\_Gauging\_Feminist\_Impact\_on\_News\_of\_Violence\_Against\_Women](http://www.academia.edu/2247510/Reformulation_Theory_Gauging_Feminist_Impact_on_News_of_Violence_Against_Women)).

[*Sustainability Tech Enablers
Increasing*](http://dsadc.org/sustainability-tech-enablers-increasing/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2015**

*By Daniel Adkins*

New techniques are being commercialized that make wind energy more
economical and consumer-reliable.   These techniques include better
batteries, and the use of ice, which can store energy when the demand is
low at night. The stored energy would then be available during peak
demand during the day.  Batteries provide energy directly during the
day’s peak demand.  Ice-Energy has created a unit, the Ice Bear, that
uses electricity to freeze water at night, for individual large
buildings and installations. During the day’s peak heat, the Ice Bear is
connected to air conditioning units via a coolant link for space
cooling. When the ice has melted, the air conditioning unit operates
normally.

[*These techniques are currently being used by Southern California
Edison*](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/22/business/energy-environment/california-picks-energy-storage-over-some-new-power-plant-bids.html),
which has an excess of nighttime wind energy from windmills.  If a
utility bases its pricing on the time of day the energy is used, then
the cost of these techniques can be compared to peak energy costs.  An
older way of meeting peak demand would be to use a jet turbine using oil
or gas.  A full-scale implementation of these, and other storage
techniques, could decrease the need for a number of power plants that
burn fossil fuels for energy.

Locally, offshore wind energy in Maryland had been stalled by a
[*Department of Defense (DoD)
objection*](http://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/navy-objects-to-maryland-offshore-wind-p-55592/)
that offshore windmills would block needed radar scans.  The defense
worry was that the Patuxent River Naval Air Station, which tests
aircraft, would not be able to observe those planes off Maryland
Atlantic shore [*when wind turbines are in
operation.*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/opinion/oped/bs-ed-great-bay-wind-20141201-story.html)  
This objection may be negated when DoD tests two radar-detecting blimps
around the Washington, DC area.  The blimps are called aerostats because
they are tethered and do not move freely.  The first one can scan out to
500 kilometers.  The second one has more precise radar and may make
observation from the Patuxent facility unnecessary.  This technology
might be needed for Virginia’s offshore wind power if our (Virginia)
bases also have issues with wind turbines.

[*Welcome to 2015*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-2015/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

Welcome to the January 2015 issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
newsletter of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America.

**Metro DC DSA members turned out for the march against police violence
Dec. 13 from Freedom Plaza to near the Justice Department.**

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="1.8645833333333333in"}

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="1.75in"}

 

[*Yearly Report: What Our Local Did in
2014*](http://dsadc.org/yearly-report-what-our-local-did-in-2014/)

Thursday, January 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; January 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

**An Overview of the Year**:  Last year was a busy one for Metro DC
Democratic Socialists of America.  Overall, the local’s members and
supporters participated in more than 50 events that had been announced
beforehand on our Meetup.com site.  Individual members and supporters
took part in several others that were not advertised on Meetup.  These
included a year-long series of conference calls exploring future
strategies for DSA at the national level, a national conference of the
Young Democratic Socialists (YDS) in August, and a three-part webinar
led by veteran activist Steve Max on how and whether U.S. capitalism can
escape from a slowly unfolding crisis in profit levels, slowing growth
rates, growing “financialization” and rising inequality that dates back
to the 1970s.

When all the numbers are added up, Metro DC local members and supporters
participated to some degree in at least 57 different DSA-related events
during the year, or more than one per week.

In addition, the *Washington Socialist,* through various contributors
published 11 editions of the local newsletter*,* which among them
contained 98 different articles addressing a variety of subjects.  On
Metro DC DSA’s Facebook page, which by year’s end boasted 255
supporters, contributors posted hundreds of different items during the
year, a surprisingly large fraction of these – but hardly all – being
contributed by a single individual, the indefatigable religious
socialist Michael Binder.

**Introducing Our Socialist Book Group**

A newly organized activity of Metro DC DSA this year is our Socialist
Book Group, which began operations in the fall with the reading and
discussion of Mary Gabriel’s *Love and Capital,* a biography of Karl
Marx and Jennie von Westphalen and their family, as well as a social
history of the tumultuous times in which Marx lived and wrote and in
which his daughters sought to carry on his work.  A discussion of a
second Book Group selection, Nick Salvatore’s award-winning social
biography of Eugene V. Debs, is scheduled to occur this coming Feb. 1.

**Major Organizing Activities and Salon Themes of the Year**

Summarizing the themes of dozens of different local-sponsored Meetup
events and hundreds of newsletter articles and Facebook entries is a
difficult task, but there were several major themes worth mentioning.

*Labor and Electoral Politics*. One big focus of the local in 2014 was
on local electoral politics and Metro DC DSA’s involvement in it, a
topic requiring somewhat extensive treatment further below.  Another key
focus was labor solidarity work, much of it through our membership in
the Washington local of Jobs with Justice (JwJ) but some of it involving
other actions.

*Racial Justice and Black Radicalism*.  Black socialist and radical
thought was a frequent though not constant theme for the local in 2014,
and a focus of several important events.  At the end of the year, local
DSAers turned out in large numbers for the Dec. 13 national march
against police violence in Washington.  A few DSA activists also took
part in locally based organizing against the police targeting of black
men in the weeks following the grand jury ruling in Ferguson, Mo.

Significant numbers of local DSA supporters also attended our August
Socialist Salon on the Afro-Caribbean and libertarian socialism of
C.L.R. James, a one-time associate of Trotsky who played a part in the
Black Power movement of the 1960s and in earlier Pan-Africanist
organizing that fostered anti-colonial revolutions in Africa following
World War II.   In a follow-up Salon, we also looked at the sometimes
conflicted relationship between African nationalist leaders and Marxist
socialists in the wake of successful anti-colonial struggles in various
parts of Africa.

*Climate Change*.  Activism around climate change was a lesser focus of
our local in 2014, but at least four Washington-area activists with DSA
ties traveled to New York City on Sept. 21 to participate with DSA
members from other areas in the huge national climate march that day. 
In October, we followed up on the climate march at our membership
meeting with a PowerPoint presentation led by Statehood Green Party
activist and Howard University professor emeritus David Schwartzman on
the economic and environmental potential of a “global green new deal.” 
To some extent, climate change politics was an unexpected feature of
Steve Max’s national DSA webinar on the crisis in U.S. capitalism, for
Max concluded that one way out of the crisis could potentially involve
“creative destruction” (or in Marxist terms, a “revolution in the
instruments in production”) featuring the rapid development of green
energy technologies in this society.

*Feminism, Socialist History, and Media and Internet Activism*.  In
other general meetings and Socialist Salons, our local also examined the
hidden socialist history of International Women’s Day, studied the
sometimes tangled history of the anarchist and socialist left since
1850, and focused on the threats to Internet openness posed by media
mergers and proposed Federal Communications Commission regulations.

*Movie Nights*.  In an echo of that last discussion, a number of DSA
members and supporters attended a special showing of the documentary
film *The Internet’s Own Boy,* outlining the inspired activism and
sometimes tormented life of Internet rebel Aaron Schwartz, at the Lamont
Street Collective in the Mt. Pleasant neighborhood of D.C.

Another special movie event that more than a dozen DSA members attended
was a special West End Theater showing of *Citizen Koch,* a documentary
on the role of big money and the Koch-funded group Citizens for
Prosperity in derailing efforts by labor activists to recall Wisconsin’s
rightwing, anti-labor governor Tom Walker.

*Legal Defense Work for Cindy McMillan of OWS Fame*.  The legal defense
of DSA activist Cindy McMillan, arrested during the Occupy Wall Street
protests in New York a few years ago and convicted of assaulting a
policeman who had grabbed her from behind at a demonstration, was the
focus of a well-attended special event that local DSA members held in
July.

*Reproductive Rights*.  Earlier in the year, a small team of DSA member
supported reproductive rights for Washington-area women by participating
in a bowl-a-thon and billiards tournament that the DC Abortion Fund
(DCAF) put on as a fundraiser.  Unfortunately, the DSA team this year
did not do very well in the DCAF tournament finals, but we are hoping
that with more practice, the recruitment of new talent, and a good deal
of luck, we may do better in 2015.

**Labor Activism in Greater Detail**.  In support of labor solidarity
and labor rights, local DSAers took part in a number of national and
local events during the year aimed at bolstering the fortunes of
organized and unorganized labor.  The challenges that the U.S. working
class faces given national and international economic trends was the
focus in two Socialist Salons and several articles in the *Washington
Socialist*, and throughout the year DSA representatives took part in
several activities to promote H.R. 1000, a national “jobs for all” bill
sponsored by Rep. John Conyers of Michigan.  In addition to showing such
theoretical solidarity with labor, local DSA members participated in
scheduled meetings of the Washington-area Jobs with Justice throughout
the year, and we contributed financial backing as well as attendees to
JwJ’s “I’ll Be There” awards dinner in the summer as well as its
Masquerade Ball at the end of the year.

Late in the year, five local DSA members attended a [*“Troublemaker’s
School”*](http://dsadc.org/troublemakers-school-schools-activists-in-tackling-trouble-facing-progressives/)
hosted by *Labor Notes* magazine and the AFL-CIO.  At the local level,
our local also had a representative present at rallies before the
District Building in favor of two bills backed by the Employment Justice
Project (EJP) and other local solidarity groups.  One of these bills
strengthens the legal protections available to low-income workers,
especially recent immigrants, who are victimized by “wage theft” on the
part of their employers.  The other bill sought to improve the chances
of people who have been released from prison being hired after serving
out their sentences, by preventing potential employers from rejecting
them without further question once they check “yes” in a box on an
employment form asking if they have legal records.  In late summer, the
DC city council passed both the anti-wage theft bill and the ban-the-box
bill promoted by EJP.

*The YDS National Conference*.  In addition to the activities above,
several younger local members and supporters attended the national Young
Democratic Socialists conference held in western Pennsylvania in August.

*Social Outreach* – Putting the “Social” in Socialism.  Then there were
the purely social events that the local sponsored to attract potential
members and give local socialists and interested outsiders a chance to
meet in a progressive atmosphere without having to attend to any
particular piece of political business.  In 2014, such social events
included monthly Socialist Happy Hours held the fourth Wednesday of each
month in the District and newly organized Socialist Happy Hours for
Northern Virginia, which were held later in the year in Arlington on the
second Thursdays of each month.  The local also held a very
well-attended Labor Day picnic at the Lamont Street Collective on Sept.
1.

*More on Our Local Electoral Work*.  As mentioned above, electoral
political work took up a large fraction of the local’s time and
attention in 2014.  Early in the year, members voted for Metro DSA to
support the candidacy of progressive restaurateur Andy Shallal, the
proprietor of the Busboys & Poets restaurants, to run for mayor in the
Democratic primaries.  Later in the year, we opted to support the Rev.
Graylan Hagler, a veteran social activist and one of the organizers of
the Respect DC coalition to demand concessions from Wal-Mart in its
siting of new stores here, in his run for an at-large seat on the
District Council.  We also supported open socialist Eugene Puryear,
running on the Statehood Green ticket, in his bid for an at-large
council seat.  In addition, we endorsed Statehood Green candidate Joyce
Robinson Paul for U.S. “shadow” representative, and two incumbent
Democrats – Council Chairman Phil Mendelson and Delegate to Congress
Eleanor Holmes Norton – for re-election.

In support of Shallal’s primary fight, our local was only able to hold a
fund-raising “meet and greet” event for the candidate.  In supporting
Hagler and Puryear, however, the local not only held “meet and greet”
fundraisers for the candidates, but individual DSA members also
canvassed for both candidates, both before the election and as poll
workers on election day.   Unfortunately, none of DSA’s endorsed
candidates except for Mendelson and Norton won this year, but our
endorsements won the notice of both the *City Paper* and the *Washington
Post,* and in the process of canvassing we came into contact with other
local progressives who could become useful allies in the future.

*Evaluating the Year’s Activity, and Thinking About the Future*.  Not
every DSA event and activity our local engaged in this year was
successful or well-attended, but some of us think we took major steps
this year in giving Metro DC DSA a more activist focus.  We also appear
to have attracted a small but growing number of younger socialists,
including women, to what, just a few years ago, was an organization
whose meetings were almost entirely monopolized by older white men.

To make further progress in the future, members of the Steering
Committee and a number of more committed activists met in November for a
day-long strategy session on what the local hopes to do in 2015.   Among
our key decisions at the strategy session were to alter the format of
our membership meetings somewhat to make them more attractive to
would-be supporters, to focus our activism this year on a single
campaign, a “Fight for 15” that will work for the adoption of a \$15 an
hour minimum wage in all three of our membership regions – DC itself,
Northern Virginia and suburban Maryland.  We also resolved to focus
Salons and monthly membership meetings largely (although not
exclusively) on labor solidarity work, feminism and the pursuit of
racial justice.  The Steering Committee will endeavor to keep
*Washington Socialist* readers up to date on these and other changes as
they are implemented.
