***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from March 2015 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*DC Metro DSA’s March Newsletter: If/When the Ice Melts, Action Picks
Up*](http://dsadc.org/dc-metro-dsas-march-newsletter-ifwhen-the-ice-melts-action-picks-up/)

Monday, March 2nd, 2015

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the March 2015 issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
online newsletter of Metro DC Democratic Socialists of America. **

The hope would be that things on the radical front will pick up in March
– they have to – if only because of the number of events that were
postponed in February due to the unusual weather. As noted in the
articles below, the local’s events came off as scheduled despite the
frigid weather. But one hopes it will be easier (and safer) to get
around if/when the ice melts. The number of issues to work on and wrongs
to right tends to fade a little from the consciousness as the assault of
the weather dominates. But as evidenced below, that array of tasks
doesn’t get smaller.

**HERE’S WHAT METRO DC DSA HAS ON FOR MARCH:**

**Membership Meeting**: The recent positive vote by the Federal
Communications Commission to regulate big Internet providers as common
carriers – utilities – is just the beginning of a longer fight to hold
on to Net Neutrality. That sometimes ambiguous term will take center
stage at the local’s regular membership meeting Sunday, March 8 at the
Watha T. Daniel/Shaw branch library, 1630 7^th^ St. NW and just a few
steps from the Shaw/Howard Metrorail station. Matt Wood, a Policy
Director of the Internet activist organization Free Press, will outline
his and other groups’ efforts to protect the open Internet, prevent
media concentration, promote affordable broadband deployment and
safeguard press freedoms.  He was formerly employed by the Media Access
Project, has worked for PBS, and is a former editor-in-chief for the
Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Review.   A remarkable effort by
media reform advocates to persuade FCC chairman Tom Wheeler to safeguard
Internet neutrality appears to reject corporate pressure for a
pay-for-access policy, and instead cements regulation of the Internet as
a public utility instead.

**Socialist Salon**: at our March 19 salon Christine Riddiough will
discuss “Second Wave Feminism: A History and Evaluation” from the
perspective of one who has lived it. Riddiough is an honorary Vice Chair
of the Democratic Socialists of America and has been an activist in the
women’s and LGBT movements since 1970. She moved to Washington, DC in
1983 to work for the National Organization for Women. She was president
of D.C.’s legendary Gertrude Stein Democratic Club, and writes
occasional blog posts on feminism and LGBT issues for DSA’s Democratic
Left blog. The Socialist Salon is 6:30 p.m. at Hunan Dynasty restaurant,
215 Pennsylvania Ave. SE on Capitol Hill, two blocks from the Capitol
South Metrorail station.\
Get last-minute information on these and other DSA events at our
[*Meetup
page*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=b2eae4d437&e=003de9ccab).

**Other promising events**: We noted this last month even though it
didn’t happen till March because it looked so good. DSA comrade Nelson
Lichtenstein is one of the many scholars at UM College Park March 5.
[*“**Organizing for Power and Workers’ Rights in the 21st
Century”***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=26dbef8b35&e=003de9ccab)
is being offered by the Center for the Study of the New America at UMCP
Thursday, March 5. It’s a day-long session with the morning devoted to
today’s labor conditions and prospects (with UFCW’s Dan Schlademan, the
leader of the Walmart organizing campaign, on a panel and a keynote by
AFL-CIO Treasurer Elizabeth Shuler) and the afternoon focused on labor
aspects of globalization and immigration, including a panel with
Lichtenstein. It’s all in the Juan Ramon Jimenez Room at Stamp Student
Union. [*The Southern Labor Studies
Association*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=deb8ddd15b&e=003de9ccab),
a co-sponsor on this event, continues its conference down at GW for the
rest of the weekend.\
And speaking of postponements, DSA remains a cosponsor of the [***Peace
Action forum on
Syria***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=5e418ced60&e=003de9ccab)
originally scheduled for Feb. 21 but a victim of particularly unpleasant
weather conditions and rescheduled for Saturday, April 11. More details
in the April issue.

***IN THIS ISSUE:***\
**The Department of Institutional Memory**: Mike Harrington’s birthday
has come around and the number of folks in DSA who directly remember him
has diminished and the number who ask “What kind of person was he; what
did he do, again?” has risen. His biographer *Maurice Isserman* answers
the question aptly and invites us all to engage with how “America’s
oldest Young Socialist” fits our history and our present – and our
future. Some of us heard him say, as he did so many times, that the
future was of necessity going to hold “socialism” of some sort and it
was up to us to determine what sort that would be – more humane or more
authoritarian. The piece is [*from the *Democratic Left*
blog*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=83fe6e840f&e=003de9ccab).

**One persistent debate** among socialists is how to deal with the
actually existing electoral landscape. Being democratic socialists means
– among other things – participating in elections. When there are no
socialists on the ballot, other measures are necessary, and the debate
on how to manage that activity took unusually well-defined form at the
recent Young Democratic Socialists conference in New York. *Bryan
Kovalick* was among several of our comrades who attended and[ *he
presents a
“reportback”*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=051815cc0d&e=003de9ccab)
on the event.

**The radical Syriza party** in Greece assembled a governing coalition
after its victory in the most recent elections and began campaigning to
ease the grip of severe austerity imposed by the powers of the Eurozone.
Does their fight have a future; indeed, what is the future of the
Eurozone and its currency? Several European economists have forecast a
difficult and gloomy future for the whole enterprise because of
structural inequalities. *Andy Feeney*[ *reviews the
book*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6681b6f55d&e=003de9ccab)
and the perspective.

**Metro DC DSA’s February Socialist Salon** was devoted to the immediacy
of Greece’s agony under the austerity regime. [*Guided by discussion
leader *Simon
Davis*,*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=79e64df690&e=003de9ccab)
who grew up in Greece, the salon attendees discussed the topic on the
eve of the new government’s engagement with its creditors in search of
relief.

**A convenience everyone uses** – the Internet – is (according to the
FCC as of Feb. 26) so important that it should be classed and regulated
as a public utility. According to the mega-corporate powers like Comcast
and Verizon, that’s too much regulation. *Carolyn Byerly* [*examines the
issues involved
*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=9f1b2e738e&e=003de9ccab)and
the fights that probably still remain ahead on the subject of Net
Neutrality (see the listing for the March membership meeting, above).

**Regulation – or lack of it** – of another critical public service was
on the agenda at Metro DC DSA’s February membership meeting. Local
electric power provider Pepco hopes to merge with Exelon, the *really*
large power company from Illinois. [*Voices against the “takeover” are
heard
*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=a44ba2f2a7&e=003de9ccab)before
the Public Service Commission and in the DSA meeting, *Andy Feeney*
relates.

**Business as usual** seems to be the theme for the newish
administration of Mayor Muriel Bowser. And the by-elections that will
fill her Council seat and that of recently deceased Councilmember (and
former Mayor) Marion Barry appear to be proceeding “as usual” as well,
with candidates anointed by the powerful winning in the attention and
money stakes, *Bill Mosley* includes in [*a roundup of recent DC
political
news.*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=d9fda38b09&e=003de9ccab).

**Two recent, acclaimed motion pictures** have traced the struggles for
justice of separate but quite related movements. *Kurt Stand* reviews
“[*Selma” and “She’s Beautiful When She’s
Angry.”*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=96f7d2f031&e=003de9ccab)

**In Maryland, the hijacking of a progressive idea** by the pro-business
neoliberal agenda is not that unusual, but rarely does so clear a case
study of the process emerge as a commission on the state’s business
climate put in place by the powerful leaders of the two General Assembly
houses, quashing a bid to turn war money toward human needs. *Woody
Woodruff* narrates [*the tale of the Augustine
Commission*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=5a69f2f5c8&e=003de9ccab).

[***Good Reads for
Socialists***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=bf43d564b2&e=003de9ccab)
has a goodly chunk of works to recommend on the Greek crisis, but there
are also the ambiguities of meritocracy, the latest from the American
Legislative Exchange Council and more about movies.

**You can read these and other past articles in the *Washington
Socialist* on our website where they are archived,**
[***dsadc.org***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=ea66a23bb6&e=003de9ccab)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
All newsletter articles in full are available on the local’s website at
[*dsadc.org*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=fb1f9586fe&e=003de9ccab)

You can get the latest, including any changes, on Metro DC DSA events by
checking our [*Meetup
Page*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=77c1b441e7&e=003de9ccab).

**DCDSA’s *The Washington Socialist* can be in your inbox the first of
every month. Ask for it at**
[***dsadcxchange@gmail.com***](mailto:dsadcxchange@gmail.com) or
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com)

Metro DC DSA is the Washington local of Democratic Socialists of
America, the nation’s largest socialist organization. Information on
where we stand and how to join us is at
[*DSAUSA.org*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=627ff61ff5&e=003de9ccab)*.*

[*2015 Young Democratic Socialists Winter Conference: Toward an
Intersectional Left: A
Reportback*](http://dsadc.org/2015-young-democratic-socialists-winter-conference-toward-an-intersectional-left-a-reportback/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2015**

*By Bryan Kovalick*

Over Valentine’s Day Weekend I, along with four other members of the
Metro DC DSA, rode a bus bound for New York City. We headed to this
year’s Young Democratic Socialist Winter Conference. And though we
arrived far too late on Friday night to attend the conference’s opening
plenary on police violence, our trip north was not without its own
discussions on politics, labor, and socialist news.

The Saturday morning plenary included two speeches on the importance of
being a socialist and roles that socialists can have in shaping a more
just, free, and egalitarian society. Speaking immediately after DSA
Vice-Chair Joe Schwartz was our comrade Jose Gutierrez. Together, Jose
and Joe began the day of the conference on a high note speaking of the
necessity of raising the minimum wage into a living wage, the need for
fully-funded public services and goods, and the need to organize working
class [*\[DD1\]*](http://dsadc.org/2015/03/page/2/#_msocom_1) power to
build a mass movement for socialism in the 21^st^ century.

Following their morning talk, I attended a workshop on the 7 habits of
highly effective chapters. To my actual dismay, there were not 7 habits
that Philly DSA member Dustin Guastella could impart to me. But Dustin
had plenty of useful tips for improving the growing and improving of
one’s chapter. This workshop gave me a moment to reflect on the
strengths and weaknesses of our own chapter.
[*\[DD2\]*](http://dsadc.org/2015/03/page/2/#_msocom_2)

When I assess our chapter I see that we do organize great salons and
talks on interesting and very topical matters. However we do not do the
best job advertising our events and ourselves as socialists to the
interested public. And although we do have several ways for prospective
members to become involved with our chapter, we do not do the best job
at retaining their long-term interest and commitment. Furthermore we
also seem to fail at times to develop prospective socialists into
fully-fledged socialists. But I think both of these issues would be
improved by committing more of our chapter to the Fight for \$15
campaign. I think there’s a lot of truth to the saying that we grow as
socialists by doing socialist work. And committing ourselves to this
work would not only help build working class power by reducing the power
of the 1%, but it will also help us to grow as a chapter and as seasoned
socialist organizers.

After Dustin’s workshop concluded, I attended another one given by
Boston DSA member Jared Abbott that delved more deeply into meaning of
socialism. Jared’s presentation asked us to define socialism in our
terms, before he then challenged our notions by posing a series of
thought-provoking hypothetical questions to us. This presentation gave
us some much needed time to unpack our conceptions of socialism by
asking us to critically ponder our own understanding of the term. From
this I gained a little more insight into my own assumptions, and learned
a little more about how I could defend my belief in socialism from
valuable criticism. For that reason, I really enjoyed Jared’s
presentation.

Saturday concluded with a reportback section where each individual
chapter and regional organizer had the opportunity before the entire
conference to present their members, talk about their campaigns and
issues they’re working to address, and a little about the struggles and
success they’ve had as a chapter . Some of the newer chapters like the
students from Case Western University talked about the struggles they’re
having as they move from an organizing committee to an established
chapter, particularly with membership recruitment and choosing a
campaign focus. Likewise some older and more established chapters like
Sewanee University discussed their continuing success in developing
their chapter and their work in solidarity with the local Nashville,
Tenn.  Black Lives Matter movement.

Though I was happy to see so many older chapters in attendance, I was
especially thrilled to learn that New York City colleges were so well
represented at the conference. Just within the last year or so, many
young socialists, who were almost all of working class backgrounds from
around NYC, helped organize and start four new campus chapters at
different city colleges. All of these are in addition to the New York
DSA local, which has been revitalized with several new members.

After the reportback period, we left the conference’s CUNY grounds and
made our way to Brooklyn for our socialist party that night. The party
gave us a nice way to socialize together in a very stress-less and
unstructured setting, which the very scheduled nature of the conference
often doesn’t allow.

Sunday’s opening plenary was given by a representative of the A. Philip
Randolph Caucus and one from the Left Caucus. The representative of the
former was our chapter’s own David Duhalde, while the latter was NYC DSA
member Neal Meyer. David and Neal presented their vision of DSA’s
electoral strategy and the goals DSA should position itself to achieve
in the near and immediate term. Both speakers felt the old DSA electoral
strategy of realignment was dead. Duhalde and Meyer differed over what
that should mean for DSA and YDS. Duhalde embraced deprioritizing
electoral politics, while Meyer embraced supporting explicitly socialist
candidates. One longtime YDS member I spoke with described the plenary
as one of the best he’s ever seen.

To echo their sentiment, I will add that altogether the conference was
one of the best that I have ever attended. It was not only well attended
in terms of numbers, but also in that so many of the attendees were
passionate, committed, and dedicated socialists. I was even pleased at
the demographic makeup of the conference attendees. Truth be told the
conference did not achieve gender and sexual equality of representation.
But it did come closer to that goal than any other conference I’ve
attended. I was also astounded at the presence of so many nonwhite
attendees. Again, racial and ethnic representation at the conference was
not proportionately equal to society at large. But it was yet again
closer to achieving that goal than any other YDS conference I’ve been
to.

For these reasons, the issues and topics discussed, and the feeling of
optimism amongst us, I’m very glad that I chose to attend. And I am very
glad that for all the attendees who came to their first YDS conference,
they had this moment to help mold their socialist identities.

***David Duhalde contributed to this article***

[*Activism Pushed FCC Ruling on Net
Neutrality*](http://dsadc.org/activism-pushed-fcc-ruling-on-net-neutrality/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2015**

*By Carolyn M. Byerly*

The historic adoption of a policy of Net Neutrality by the Federal
Communications Commission passed by a 3-2 vote (along party lines) on
February 26, and activists across American can take a bow for a victory
that is theirs to claim.

The policy is the product of several years’ careful strategizing, letter
writing, picketing (outside FCC offices), and other hallmarks of
progressive activism by an eclectic coalition across the country.  The
call for Internet Neutrality has been actively championed by public
interest groups for several years, but this hot potato issue pitting
citizens (and their advocacy groups) against the giant corporations
controlling Internet and other media services heated up after a January
2014 federal court ruling ([**Verizon v. the
FCC**](http://www.cadc.uscourts.gov/internet/opinions.nsf/3AF8B4D938CDEEA685257C6000532062/$file/11-1355-1474943.pdf))
that told the FCC it had overreached its authority in its policy barring
broadband providers from slowing or blocking Web traffic.

The 2010 [*FCC policy that Verizon challenged had
*](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-01-14/verizon-wins-net-neutrality-court-ruling-against-fcc)required
Internet providers to treat all customers equally and to disclose their
network practices.  The US Circuit Court ruling said before the FCC
could regulate companies’ operations, it would have to decide whether
the Internet was a telecommunications industry (under Title II of the
Communications Act of 1934, regulating common carriers of information),
or a content provider.  This legal distinction is one that, in the first
instance, enables the FCC to regulate the Internet like a utility and
prescribe how service shall be provided, but in the second does not. 
With the new February 26 policy, FCC is now able to prevent the creation
of a tiered pricing structure (and the differentials in speed and
capacity based on what a client pays that would come with it) as lobbied
for by the telecom giants.

Plans to roll out a strikingly progressive policy were first announced
by FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler in January, and the details were revealed in
a February 19 posting to the [*FCC
website*](http://www.fcc.gov/document/statement-fcc-chairman-tom-wheeler-fccs-open-internet-rules).
 But the back story is one that brings the role of
[*leftist*](http://centerformediajustice.org/tag/net-neutrality/),
[*feminist*](http://www.savetheinternet.com/blog/09/10/29/feminist-majority-foundation-supports-net-neutrality),
and [*civil
rights*](http://www.freepress.net/blog/2015/02/19/communities-color-speak-out-real-net-neutrality)
activism clearly into view – including the positions that our own local
[*Metro DC
DSA*](http://dsadc.org/dc-local-weighs-in-on-net-neutrality-cable-megamerger/)
has taken.  After the *Verizon v. FCC* ruling, activist groups
coordinated their letter writing and visits to FCC commissioners to
[*make a case*](http://dsadc.org/net-neutrality-and-the-ordinary-folks/)
for classifying the Internet as a telecommunications industry in order
to assure Net Neutrality.

An unprecedented 4 million-plus letters were filed with the FCC after
January 2014, most of those taking the public interest position.  By
November 2014, [*President
Obama*](http://www.commondreams.org/news/2014/11/10/response-unprecedented-public-outcry-obama-goes-big-net-neutrality)
called the Internet “one of the most significant democratizing
influences the world has ever known,” and advocated protecting the
Internet from monopoly control.  Although an independent agency, FCC is
presently under Democratic control with three commissioners, including
the chairman.  All FCC commissioners are by presidential appointment,
with the party in the White House holding the majority.

But the story does not end with the February 26 policy adoption. 
Conservative forces in Congress are now plotting to thwart the FCC with
[*a
strategy*](http://www.politico.com/story/2015/02/gop-game-plan-on-net-neutrality-115124.html)
that includes investigations into alleged White House interference in
FCC process, launching public criticism of the FCC, and crafting
legislation to reverse the present policy of Net Neutrality.  The
telecom giants are also threatening lawsuits saying that the FCC has
over-reached its authority and essentially put regulation of the
Internet into the hands of government.  There is logic to their claims
in the second of these contentions, but government (remember that
representative of citizens?) is the only entity with the power to speak
and act for the great majority of US residents who rely on digital
communications.

Activists’ work is not over if Net Neutrality is to be maintained. 
Ironically, because the mainstream news (owned by some of those same
giant parent companies that control the Internet) covered this David and
Goliath contest so avidly, there is a strong likelihood that the number
of media activists has swollen these last months.

***The author has been part of the public-interest lobbying for Net
Neutrality through her role in*** [****Howard Media
Group****](http://www.howardmediagroup.org/)***, an activist academic
organization at Howard University***

[*DC Politics Roundup: Democracy Takes a Back Seat in DC Special
Elections*](http://dsadc.org/dc-politics-roundup-democracy-takes-a-back-seat-in-dc-special-elections/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2015**

*By Bill Mosley*

We in Washington DC are often told we live in a democracy, but reality
often seems to indicate otherwise.  The most obvious democratic
shortcoming is the ability of Congress to intervene at will in the
District’s governance, something it cannot do to, or in, any of the 50
states.  But sometimes elements within DC itself conspire to undermine
what little democracy we have.

Take the April 28 special elections to fill D.C. Council vacancies in
Wards 4 and 8, for example.  The ascension of former Ward 4
Councilmember Muriel Bowser to the office of mayor, and the death of
Ward 8 Councilmember and former Mayor Marion Barry, could have provided
an opening for fresh ideas and a vigorous debate about issues facing the
wards and the city.  And indeed, there have been no shortage of
candidates for the seats, with 14 on the ballot in Ward 4 and 16 in Ward
8.  However, in both wards there are attempts to turn both elections
into coronations and to short-circuit any debate on the
issues.[*\[Cc1\]*](http://dsadc.org/2015/03/page/2/#_msocom_1)

In Ward 4, Mayor Bowser has cranked up the Green Machine, the ward’s
formidable Democratic organization, in support of her hand-picked
successor Brandon Todd, whose principal qualification is his service to
Bowser as a campaign and Council aide.  Ward 4 has slipped into
something resembling monarchy, starting in 2007 when Adrian Fenty,
leaving his Ward 4 seat to take office as Mayor, tapped Bowser as his
successor and put his electoral machine at her service.  During Fenty’s
four-year battle with DC unions, especially those representing teachers,
he had in Bowser a reliable ally on the Council.  Now Bowser is seeking
to give Todd a leg-up, regardless of what voters of the ward might
think, and [*Todd’s 10-to-one fundraising advantage over his closest
rival*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/dc-politics/bowser-backed-candidates-hold-big-fundraising-leads-in-dc-council-races/2015/02/03/c7bdfc80-abc0-11e4-9c91-e9d2f9fde644_story.html)
is thanks to his patron’s influence.

Bowser is also hoping to extend her influence to Ward 8, where she has
thrown her weight behind former Barry aide [*LaRuby May, who also enjoys
a huge fundraising
edge*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/dc-politics/bowser-backed-candidates-hold-big-fundraising-leads-in-dc-council-races/2015/02/03/c7bdfc80-abc0-11e4-9c91-e9d2f9fde644_story.html)
over her gaggle of rivals.  But other ward activists are looking for a
more old-fashioned kind of coronation – the elevation of Barry’s son,
Marion C. Barry (who was known as Christopher Barry before his father’s
death when his political ambition kicked in).  Those pinning their hopes
on the younger Barry do so despite his seeming to possess none of his
father’s political skills or vision but all of his penchant for
generating bad headlines, and then some:  [*Earlier this year, Marion C.
was arrested for threatening a bank clerk, and, like his father, he has
a history with illegal drugs – having pleaded guilty a few years ago to
possessing marijuana and
PCP*](http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/christopher-barry-son-late-mayor-review-article-1.2077811). 
His political resume is largely a blank slate.

If one looks beyond the mayoral endorsements and familiar names, the
huge fields of candidates offer numerous hopefuls with promising
backgrounds if not prospects to match.  In Ward 8, Nate Bennett-Fleming
is making a second run for the Council, having lost the Democratic
at-large primary last year to Anita Bonds.  Fleming was an able advocate
for DC statehood in his single term as statehood (or “shadow”)
representative to the House of Representatives.  Also in Ward 8, Eugene
D. Kinlow runs on his record of advocating DC voting representation in
Congress as a staff*\[Cc2\]*  member for DC Vote.  Sheila Bunn is
running on a thick resume that includes stints as aides to former Mayor
Vince Gray and Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton.

In Ward 4, Renee L. Bowser (no relation to the mayor) is making a second
run for Council, having lost to the other Bowser in the 2007 special
election.  Bowser, an advisory neighborhood commissioner and a former
attorney for the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union,
is championing strengthened workers’ rights and affordable housing
programs.  Pedro Rubio Jr., a past council candidate, is hoping to
become DC’s first Latino councilmember by taking up former Councilmember
Tommy Wells’ “livable, walkable city” crusade.

These are not the only “outsider” candidates worth considering; many of
them are still shaping their platforms and priorities. But will these
voices get a fair shot in a campaign that is shaping up to be dominated
by machine politics, money and name recognition?  Although the pols have
been picking their favorites, progressive organizations that plan to
make endorsements – including the Metropolitan Washington Council
AFL-CIO – are still scrutinizing the choices.

**Bowser Pulls Plug on Franklin School Arts Center**

Mayor Bowser’s decision to scuttle the planned arts center in the
Franklin School, the landmark 1869 building at 13^th^ and K St. NW, may
be a troubling portent of the priorities of her two-month-old
administration.  The old school, which has been unoccupied since Mayor
Fenty closed the homeless shelter there in 2008, has been eyed hungrily
by developers due to the commercial potential of the structure and its
central location.  However, Mayor Gray’s administration backed proposals
put forward by nonprofit arts groups, which would include using the site
for arts education for children.  [*As Philip Kennicott reported in the
*Washington
Post*,*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/museums/a-setback-for-dc-arts-and-culture-years-in-the-making/2015/02/16/94371d20-b3b7-11e4-854b-a38d13486ba1_story.html)
developers interested in the site contributed heavily to Bowser’s
election campaign and inauguration.  One could argue that an arts center
may not be the best use of a downtown space – the former homeless
shelter addressed a more pressing need – but at least it preserved the
building for public use, unlike those who would turn it into a hotel or
a high-end retail center.  If this is an early indication of how Bowser
will treat public properties, it will be a happy one for deep-pocketed
developers but for no one else.

**Marijuana Legalization Moves Ahead, then Backward**

In the wake of attempts by Congress to undo last November’s voter
initiative to fully legalize marijuana in the District, the DC Council
fell into its time-honored pattern of mild defiance followed by hasty
retreat.  In the face of a rider in the DC appropriations bill stating
that the District could not use local funds to “enact” the measure, DC
officials said they would nevertheless move ahead with legalization,
since voters had already “enacted” the measure at the ballot box.  But
last month, at the urging of newly elected DC Attorney General Karl
Racine, the Council cancelled a planned hearing on how to regulate legal
marijuana over concerns that this would violate the congressional
restriction.  As a result, as legalization took effect on Feb. 26,
uncertainty reigned as to exactly when and where one could possess or
use marijuana, and there were no guidelines for commercial cultivation
or sale.  Meanwhile, congressional Republicans who opposed legalization
threatened Mayor Bowser with legal action for allowing the initiative to
move forward. This battle has a long future, and if nothing else it may
convince more District residents of the urgency of getting DC out from
under the thumb of Congress.

**DC More United on Budget Autonomy**

On a happier note, it seems that the [*mayor and Council may now be on
the same page when it comes to challenging Congress on the need to free
the District’s budget from the congressional appropriations
process*](http://www.washingtoncitypaper.com/blogs/looselips/2015/02/13/bowser-could-back-budget-autonomy-amendment/). 
In 2013, DC voters approved a referendum declaring that DC would
henceforth spend its own locally raised funds free of congressional
interference, as the governments of all 50 states do.  Whether the vote
would pass constitutional muster was in grave doubt – the Constitution
gives Congress authority over all DC legislation – but as a political
matter, it at showed that patience of DC voters with federal meddling in
its affairs (such as the marijuana referendum) was at an end.  Yet Mayor
Gray sided with ever-cautious DC Attorney General Irving Nathan and
challenged the city’s own referendum in court, choosing to support
legalistic reasoning over the fight for democracy.  However, Mayor
Bowser has publicly indicated that she is rethinking Gray and Nathan’s
position, a strong hint that her office may drop the challenge and
present a united front with the Council in demanding budget autonomy. 
If so, this would be a welcome development; instead of meekly asking for
its rights, DC government and its citizens need to demand them.

[*February Salon Examines the State of Greek Politics on the Threshold
of
Crisis*](http://dsadc.org/salon-examines-the-state-of-greek-politics-on-the-threshold-of-crisis/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

**The Washington Socialist&lt;&gt;March 2015**

Simon Davis, a DSA ally who grew up in and got his bachelor’s degree in
economics in Greece, led the DSA Salon discussion on the financial
crisis and the rise of the radical Syriza party in the midst of wide
public discontent with the crushing effect of austerity measures
dictated by the country’s (mostly Northern European) creditors. Just a
few days after the Salon discussion, Syriza’s coalition gained a
four-month breather on their required loan repayments – an outcome
variously characterized as a defeat or a partial victory for the
beleaguered nation.

Davis provided ***WS*** with the notes with which he led off the
conversation:

** How do you pronounce Syriza?**

Per [*Paul
Mason*](https://twitter.com/paulmasonnews/status/557670343142559745) on
twitter: “Like Syria but with a Z”

**What is Syriza and where did it come from?** (from Dimitris Bounias
[*writing for *The
Nation**](http://m.thenation.com/article/195441-syriza-rising))

“Syriza, or the Coalition of the Radical Left, is the product of a
turbulent series of realignments on the Greek left outside the ranks of
the KKE, the veteran Moscow-oriented Communist Party. Its origins can be
traced to the coalition that was formed in 1989 between the Communists
and the reformed left wing, which (after the Communists’ departure)
joined with other Marxist, Trotskyist, Green, feminist and independent
groups. Popular in intellectual and cultural circles, it had little
success at the polls (SD note: typically around 4-5%) until the crisis
propelled it to second place in the elections of 2012.

Syriza still has many Marxist voices among its active members (including
the party’s head of economic policy), and the red flag and five-pointed
star in its logo will forever scare away the anticommunists. But its
internal debate about whether to stay in the eurozone was largely
settled by 2012; since then, its rhetoric has been both softened and
streamlined. The party that once vowed to tear up the bailout agreement
and nationalize the banks now speaks in a more unified and conciliatory
voice, affirming its commitment to Europe while promising to open tough
new negotiations with the lenders.”

**Does this win mean Greeks turned radical leftist within the space of a
few years? **

No. A comparison of the
[*2009*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_legislative_election,_2009)
and the
[*2015*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_legislative_election,_2015)
election results shows that Syriza largely took over old PASOK
center-left strongholds.

Here is how party leader Alexis Tsipras himself discussed the issue at
[*Brookings on Jan
2013*](http://www.brookings.edu/%7E/media/events/2013/1/22%20greece%20economy/20130122_tsipras_transcript.pdf):

reece is a country with the uniqueness of having two large parties in
its political scene — what we call the Democratic and the Conservative
party. In years past, this was the difference between the Venizelists
and the Royalists

During the National Resistance, which was a great moment in Greek
history, the democratic side fought on the side of freedom and progress
and identified itself with the National Liberation Front. After the
civil war — as you know, history is usually written by the victors —
there was a continuation of this tradition. Historical analysts say that
the Democratic Party in our country always was the majority. And
following the dictatorship, this group was won over by Andreas
Papandreou. And many say that he copied slogans from the radical left.

Today, following the unfortunate choices of George Papandreou and the
tragic path taken by our country, this political area is now being
represented by SYRIZA, a party that does not abandon its traditions, its
values, and all its beliefs from the left; however, it meets together
with other parties from the socialist side and wants to express a
younger generation and the social strata that are the middle class but
especially, the poor class, that is being disparaged by this economic
crisis, who are on the fringes of society. And unfortunately, it’s a
large part of the population.”

Fun fact also from that Brookings talk: The precursor to the current
center right New Democracy was called the [*National Radical
Union*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Radical_Union).

**So what will Syriza try to do, and what are the odds it might
happen?**

First and foremost achieve a favorable renegotiation of the current
troika programme. Per FinMin Varoufakis and other analysts, same
principal on bonds, lower interest, extended maturity, lower primary
surplus targets, rollback on required reforms, and some kind of
commitment to growth strategies for the economy. This is a far cry from
his [*Modest
Proposal*](http://yanisvaroufakis.eu/euro-crisis/modest-proposal/) which
is an EU-wide plan that is quite sensible indeed, but Greece needs
immediate relief.

As of right now, Greece applied for a 6 month loan extension broadly
under those terms and ECB+European Commission seemed OK with it, but
Germany seems unconvinced and wants more concessions. It’s anyone’s
guess what it will take to sway the Germans right now, but Greece has
committed to an EU/Euro course and shown good faith. Next days are
crucial.

On the other domestic policies, expect less police state, improved human
rights policies, but no strong butting heads with the powerful Orthodox
Church. Likewise oligarchs will probably not be fought, at least not
right away. Syriza leaders have cited Latin America as their model for
Left reform, so expect that–as well as pragmatism about EU, NATO, and
long term strategic interests to guide decision making.

**Additional reading:**

*NY Times* op-ed by Kostas Vaxevanis: “[*Greece’s Rotten
Oligarchy*](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/07/opinion/greeces-rotten-oligarchy.html?_r=0)”

*Washington Post* Wonkblog: “[*Greece Really Might Leave the
Euro*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2015/01/30/greece-really-might-leave-the-euro/)”

Yanis Varoufakis: “[*A Modest Proposal for Resolving the Eurozone Crisis
– Version 4.0*](http://yanisvaroufakis.eu/euro-crisis/modest-proposal/)”

(Long read) Michael Pettis: “*Syriza and the French indemnity of
1871-73*”

***Simon Davis, a DC resident, writes for* VICE USA *and is active with
the Center for Inquiry.***

[*Good Reads for
Socialists*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-2/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist*&lt;&gt;March 2015**

**We devoted our February Salon to the Greek finance crisis**, just days
before the newly elected Syriza-led coalition got a four-month extension
on loan payments. Simon Davis, who led the discussion, suggested these
further readings.

*NY Times* op-ed by Kostas Vaxevanis: “[*Greece’s Rotten
Oligarchy*](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/07/opinion/greeces-rotten-oligarchy.html?_r=0)”

*Washington Post* Wonkblog: “[*Greece Really Might Leave the
Euro*](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2015/01/30/greece-really-might-leave-the-euro/)”

Yanis Varoufakis: “[*A Modest Proposal for Resolving the Eurozone Crisis
– Version 4.0*](http://yanisvaroufakis.eu/euro-crisis/modest-proposal/)”

And a long read, Michael Pettis: “*Syriza and the French indemnity of
1871-73*”

Andy Feeney adds: “*Jacobin* has been posting a number of pieces about
the state of the Syriza government. Reading all of them is probably a
good idea. This particular piece by Leo Panitch has relevance beyond
Greece and the immediate moment”:
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/02/syriza-interview-leo-panitch-solidarity/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/02/syriza-interview-leo-panitch-solidarity/) 
A key paragraph:  “The tragedy of this, of course, is that, apart from
the
[*demonstration*](http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/02/15/greece-solidarity-london-syriza_n_6688238.html)
in London in support of Syriza I read about last week, where is the
European left? I don’t just mean that as the broader or more radical
left, which should be demonstrating in great numbers, but also the
social democrats. The left-wing social democrats and the unions should
be sitting \[in\] on their leaders. After all, the German social
democrats are in the German government for heaven’s sake!”

Another specific nugget from *Jacobin*’s Greek crisis articles is this
one by Mark Blyth, which also takes on the rather reprehensible German
role in all this (“disturbingly American, if not Thatcherite”) and has
been widely discussed on the DSA-Activist listserv:
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/02/germany-austerity-blyth-speech-spd/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/02/germany-austerity-blyth-speech-spd/)

James K. Galbraith writes in *Social Europe* that Greece did not suffer
the setback in its negotiations with the “Troika” that many commentators
are asserting. Galbraith is a former academic colleague of the Greek
finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, for what that’s worth. We get this
one by way of *Portside*:
[*http://portside.org/2015-02-27/reading-greek-deal-correctly*](http://portside.org/2015-02-27/reading-greek-deal-correctly)

**++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++**

A review in *Jacobin* of a recent film some in our local have enjoyed –
“Inherent Vice,” Paul Thomas Anderson’s movie based on the 2009 Thomas
Pynchon novel of that name. The analysis is occasionally strained but
there are some real insights.
[*https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/02/inherent-vice-review-counterculture/*](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/02/inherent-vice-review-counterculture/)

Larry Mishel and Will Kimball at the Economic Policy Institute report on
and update the work of economist Colin Gordon, who has pegged a recent
trend linking declines in union membership with increases in the share
of income going to the top 10 percent. Links to Gordon’s work are there
as well.
http://www.epi.org/publication/unions-decline-and-the-rise-of-the-top-10-percents-share-of-income/

As sometimes reluctant participants in an alleged meritocracy – and
often as knowledge-work strivers – we find ourselves struggling to deal
with that concept: what is deserved, what is earned, how is merit
allocated, what are the metrics? Lani Guinier is interviewed by a
*Salon* writer in this piece carried by *Portside*.
[*http://portside.org/2015-02-10/meritocracy-and-testocracy-interview-lani-guinier*](http://portside.org/2015-02-10/meritocracy-and-testocracy-interview-lani-guinier)

The “tech solutions” to climate change are a booming idea market. One of
the most long-standing efforts has been CCS, or “carbon capture and
sequestration.” Among other things, it’s a way to keep burning fossil
fuels, especially coal. The costs of this process – let alone its
effectiveness – are always up for debate. This article from the
indispensable enviro publication *Grist* sums up the latest:
http://exp.grist.org/clean-coal?utm\_source=newsletter&utm\_medium=email&utm\_term=Weekly%2520Feb%252017&utm\_campaign=weekly

The latest on our friends at the American Legislative Exchange Council,
or ALEC – the right-wing outfit that uses Koch Bros. money to fuel
anti-worker legislation at the state level. The plan appears to be to
accelerate their attempt to slow municipal and local-government minimum
wage increases by setting ceilings on them in state law. From the
Guardian:
[*http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/20/alec-rightwing-lobby-group-minimum-wage?CMP=ema\_565*](http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/20/alec-rightwing-lobby-group-minimum-wage?CMP=ema_565)

[*Greek Tragedy: The Economies of the European Periphery In a Labyrinth
of Austerity, With No Visible
Exit*](http://dsadc.org/greek-tragedy-the-economies-of-the-european-periphery-in-a-labyrinth-of-austerity-with-no-visible-exit/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

Book Review of *Crisis in the Eurozone,* by Costas Lapavitsas et. al.,
Verso Books (London and New York), 2012, 243 pp., \$19.95

The pagan myths of ancient Greece include stirring adventure sagas along
with remarkably striking images of humans and even gods undergoing
terrible, seemingly unending degradation.  Even the great hero Hercules
eventually suffers a tortured death after he dons the poisoned shirt of
the Centaur Nessus; the Titan Prometheus, the benefactor of all
humankind, is chained to a mountain in the Caucasus where a giant eagle
tears repeatedly at his liver, for eons.  The bloody robber Procrustes
straps victims to a cramped bed and lops off protruding limbs to make
them fit.  And the Athenian warrior king Theseus, hoping to rescue his
city from paying an annual tribute of young men and maidens to King
Minos of Crete, faces a flesh-eating monster, the Minotaur, in a huge
underground labyrinth where escape initially seems unimaginable.

What even the most terrible old Greek tales generally lack, though, is
an appreciation for the kinds of torture that can be inflicted by modern
capitalist financial relationships and government institutions enforcing
them.  In *Crisis in the Eurozone,* the Greek Marxist political
economist Costas Lapavitsas and several colleagues at the University of
London help correct this deficiency.  In this book, they describe the
institutions and the social and economic results of the Eurozone project
in dry, unemotional prose that might be lifted from a bank auditor’s
report; yet the picture that emerges evokes much of the “pity and
terror” that the bloody, tragic ancient myths inspire.

Since the global financial crisis began unfolding in 2007, initially as
a result of speculative trading in mortgage-backed securities in the
United States, the Eurozone as a totality has experienced severe
economic shocks. The weaker, smaller economies at the periphery of the
European Monetary Union or EMU –those of Greece, Portugal, Spain,
Ireland, and Italy – have experienced a long season in hell, which
continues today with barely a pause.  As Lapavitsas writes in the
preface to this volume, the rules and structure of the Eurozone have
“grossly magnified the recessionary forces present in the European
economy,” and the burden of paying for the crisis has been passed to the
European working class in the form of “reduced wages and pensions,
higher unemployment, unraveling of the welfare state, deregulation and
privatization.”

The so-called troika consisting of the Eurozone countries, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and  the European Central Bank (ECB),
have imposed drastic austerity in the name of supposedly helping the
indebted  periphery governments  recover economically, and the austerity
hasn’t worked.  Greece, perhaps the hardest hit economy, has now
suffered from five years of depression with unemployment exceeding 25
percent and youth unemployment reaching 50 percent.  A large fraction of
the population is in poverty.  That’s why the new leftwing political
coalition Syriza, to the dismay of the Troika, won the recent Greek
elections, and why Syriza leader Alex Tsipras has recently been
demanding a renegotiation of Greece’s financial program with the
country’s creditors – although with how much success seems unclear at
this writing. At press time Syriza’s late-February deal with the
“troika” to forestall loan payments four months is being declared a
victory for austerity by some and a tactical advance for Syriza’s
anti-austerity drive by others, with opinion ranging widely in both the
financial and mainstream press

Why have things unraveled so badly for Greece and other weak economies
in the EMU?

Beginning in around 2009, when the ripple effects of the “subprime”
mortgage crisis in the United States began to threaten the European
banks, the weaker European economies suffered their own financial
crisis, and to keep their private banks from collapsing and triggering
further catastrophe, the governments of Greece, Spain and other
peripheral economies went deeply into debt themselves to bail out their
banks. Yet their rescue efforts, like the labors of Sisyphus, may have
been futile, for their creditors – chiefly large banks in Germany and
France – quickly became alarmed by their rising public debts, and
international speculators began making bets against Greek government
bonds, hoping to make a killing.  Meanwhile the Eurozone’s rules,
although they have not always been strictly enforced for stronger
economies at the European core, mandate strict limits on government
deficits.  Greece and several governments in the periphery were quickly
deemed in violation of these rules.

The upshot is that since 2010, when a major rescue package was put in
place for Greece, the Greek government, to placate its creditors, has
been required to impose sweeping austerity measures on its citizens, as
have the governments of Portugal and Spain, among others.  In fact,
governments across the Eurozone, including in the stronger economies of
the core, have adopted austerity programs of varying severity.  Rather
than fighting the recession with deficit spending, they have restricted
public social expenditures and public employment, adopted more
“flexible” labor regulations and the like, to reduce deficits or
increase surpluses.

Yet because such austerity measures have reduced total spending, the EU
in the last year has come dangerously close to falling into a condition
of persistent “deflation,” which to some economists is mostly a polite
word for serious recession.  And in Greece, the recession has turned
into the Greek Depression, which in turn has increased rather than
reduced the debt in proportion to the size of the economy.

For years, economists such as Nobel laureate Paul Krugman and Dean
Baker, along with some European politicians and leftists, have been
calling for a redesign of the Eurozone to deal with these problems, and
especially to reduce the cost to labor in general and the working people
of the periphery in particular.  As noted, Syriza won control of the
Greek government by vowing to fight for a relaxation of the harsh
austerity agreements now governing their nation’s relations with its
creditors, whose financial help Athens needs to avoid bankruptcy.

Yet the German government, as this goes to press, so far refuses to cut
Syriza much slack, and to Lapavitsas and other members of the Research
on Money and Finance (RMF) group who collectively composed *Crisis in
the Eurozone,* persistent hopes within the European left for a kinder,
gentler Eurozone are likely an illusion.  The Eurozone as it exists is
“unsustainable,” this book argues, and it is unsustainable primarily
because of the class interests of the European financial elites who
constructed it.

As Lapavitsas puts it in his preface, the Eurozone exists because “The
ruling strata of Europe have been determined to create a form of money
capable of competing against the dollar in the world market, and thereby
furthering the interests of large European banks and enterprises.”  To
allow the euro to serve as such a global reserve currency, the elites
designed the Eurozone to be resistant to inflation as well as high
government debts, and this goal has generally militated against European
governments employing Keynesian monetary and fiscal measures to control
the business cycle, leading to intractable recessions.

In particular, by mandating the use of a single currency in 19 very
different economies with differing levels of development, the Eurozone
has taken away a traditional tool that governments could otherwise use
to restore their global competitiveness: currency devaluation, which
makes their exports cheaper and imports more expensive.  With Greece and
other Eurozone members unable to devalue national currencies to address
problems with competitiveness, and with Keynesian stimulus ruled out,
the primary way Eurozone members can boost their international
competitiveness is through reducing both their imports and their labor
costs.  Given the lack of any alternative short of leaving the euro,
many have done so – at a severe cost both to labor and the general
population.

Ironically, though, financially the strongest economy in the Eurozone at
the moment, Germany, has been more successful than the weaker members,
such as Greece, at reducing labor costs over the years.  This is partly
because Germany was more technically developed to begin with and partly
because its workers enjoy higher average incomes, making reductions in
them easier.  For this and other reasons, including some biases built
into the way value of the euro was initially established against those
of various national currencies, German exports have been far more
competitive within a Eurozone context than Greek, Portuguese or Spanish
exports.

In an effort to maintain adequate consumer demand and national economic
growth, therefore, the weaker economies of the Eurozone before 2007
mostly stimulated economies by running up debts – in some cases, to
their own banks, but in many cases to the banks of Germany and other
core EU countries. In the case of Spain, the debts mostly propped up a
real estate investment bubble comparable to the one that prevailed
before 2007 in the US.  In the case of Greece, individual households
stopped saving and racked up debts in order to support enhanced consumer
spending, while the government also increased its debts while, with the
help of Goldman Sachs, hiding this from its foreign creditors.

Before 2007, the German bankers didn’t mind the rising indebtedness of
the Eurozone periphery, for they were profiting from it. The low
inflation rate in the EU made it cheap for them to obtain capital to
lend, while the rules of the Eurozone seemed to protect them against the
risks of default. The money the German and other banks lent to the
economies of the periphery also mostly returned to the core European
economies to pay for German (and other) exports.  This made the EU
initially seem like a “win-win” proposition for Greek households and
Spanish real estate developers, as well as German and Dutch bankers.

The U.S. financial crisis of 2007 and 2008 and the Eurozone financial
crisis that followed from it, however, have destroyed this arrangement,
in part because the German banks that lent heavily to Greece and other
peripheral Eurozone economies also were heavily involved in speculating
on subprime mortgage-backed securities in the US.  When the American
bubble in mortgage-backed securities popped, the German bankers suddenly
were looking at red ink on their balance sheets.  Along with their
interest in fighting European inflation to maintain the euro as a viable
competitor with the dollar, their own dire straits contributed to their
taking a hard line against concessions to their borrowers, including
Greece and other peripheral Eurozone members.

The result, according to Lapavitsas and his collaborators, is that the
weaker members of the Eurozone as well as European labor in general face
a future of endless depression.  And yet they argue that like Theseus in
his battle with the Minotaur, the weaker countries of the Euro periphery
might escape from the terrible and deadly maze in which they are
trapped.  Unfortunately, though, their most likely escape route is
itself painful and dangerous.

Only through a breaking out of the Eurozone, the authors submit, can the
Greeks in particular and the European working class in general hope for
a more positive future.  The indebted Greek government could help to
trigger such a breakup either by defaulting on its debts and quitting
the Eurozone, or through being forced into default by its creditors. 
Since there are no set provisions for any member economy leaving the
Eurozone, a Greek departure  could cause the whole thing to break apart
–  which to Lapavitsas and his collaborators, would ultimately be a good
thing.

The question then becomes how to do it.  To the authors of this book, a
Greek exit from the Eurozone could be “chaotic, undertaken at the last
moment … with minimal preparation,” which would impose substantial
additional costs on Greek society and its economy.  It also could be
conservative,” in the sense of being led by private interests “keen to
protect the existing balance of social forces,” who would continue to
enforce economic austerity.  Or there might be a “progressive” exit that
favors labor over capital, with Greece voluntarily and deliberately
defaulting and leaving the Eurozone while taking a number of radical
steps to lessen the pain of the inevitable aftermath.

For a “progressive” exit to work well, the authors state, Greece would
have to adopt “a broad programme including, at the very least, public
ownership and control over financial institutions, control over capital
flows, income and wealth redistribution, sustained industrial policy to
protect employment and ensure growth, and total restructuring of the
state in a democratic direction.” Such a progressive and indeed radical
exit strategy, if it could be carried out successfully, “could put
profound social change on the agenda for the first time in decades,” and
help a battered European labor movement move into a position of
ascendancy over European capital.

There is much else in this rather complicated account of the Eurozone
and its economic woes that is impossible to summarize here, and it might
be useful if local DSA members with professional economics training
would examine this book in some detail to investigate the many nuances
in the argument that I may have missed.

But even for a reviewer of limited economic background such as myself,
it’s clear that Lapavitsas and his RMF colleagues are charting a
possible course for Greece that is far more radical than anything that
Syriza and its supporters among the Greek people are proposing at this
point in their confrontation with their creditors.  It seems unlikely at
this moment that the Greek government is going to follow anything like
this book’s suggested course of action in the foreseeable future.

Unfortunately, if Lapavitsas and his colleagues are correct, the more
moderate attempts at reforming the Eurozone that Syriza and most of the
Social Democratic parties of Europe are currently willing to pursue are
doomed to failure.  For the sake of the European working class and for
the sake of Americans, too, perhaps DSA members should hope that
Lapavitsas and his colleagues are wrong, since their way forward —
precisely because it would be more radical than merely asking Greece’s
creditors for a little mercy — seems so difficult to for Greece to
achieve and for its creditors to accept.

[*Maryland: A Pro-worker Vision of the Future Hijacked by the Neoliberal
Agenda*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-a-pro-worker-vision-of-the-future-hijacked-by-the-neoliberal-agenda-sort-of/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2015**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Austerity is, of course, a constant refrain at the state level as well
as federal. As we see below, austerity to protect power and preserve
inequality is solemnized at many different levels and official,
expert-authority is invoked every time: Simpson-Bowles, for an egregious
example. Maryland offers another example of the ways that the neoliberal
agenda gets reproduced in apparently neutral government operations – as
well as the ways it can sometimes get subverted.

Maryland’s economy has not kept up with even the feeble recovery that is
flickering throughout the US, largely because of its dependence on
federal government employment and ancillary federal contracting by the
well-known “Beltway Bandits,” the private-sector companies that batten
off the activities of often-overburdened government agencies.

A particularly tough hit for Maryland was the sequestration of Defense
Department spending of the past several fiscal years – a sector on which
the state has particularly depended for jobs and taxable cash flow. Even
Montgomery County, with the least conservative political culture in the
state, found itself approving a craven tax break to keep Lockheed from
moving some economic activities out of the county.

Then a Republican snuck away with the governorship in November 2014 with
a metronomic claim that taxes were too high, and that the state wasn’t
business-friendly – coupled with a collapse of turnout in Democratic
strongholds.

About a week after the election, a commission tasked with shaping up the
state’s economic climate and business development approach held its
eighth and last meeting; [*its report was eventually submitted in
February*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/Pubs/CommTFWorkgrp/MEDBCC-Report-12Feb2015-revised.pdf).
Attendees at that final meeting heard from the reliable and evenhanded
legislative services budgetmeister Warren Descheneaux about the state’s
structural deficit and shortfall for the coming budget year. So in a
potent climate of austerity and tax-cutting fever, the commissioners
(and, thankfully, legislative services staffers) began to prepare their
report. What’s kind of amazing is how much worse it could have been. The
story of how the commission first came about did not give cause for
optimism – at least from the progressive point of view.

It starts in last year’s legislative session, when a [*fairly visionary
and populist
proposal*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-looks-at-formal-state-body-on-defense-transition/)
entered the scrum. It would have created a Maryland Futures Commission
with a goal to survey alternative, non-defense sources of jobs, economic
activity and delivery of public goods for the state. The proposed bill
actually contained the dread phrase “industrial policy” in the mission
“…to develop plans and policies to ensure a competitive advantage for
Maryland as Federal military spending declines.” The initiative for the
bill came from Fund Our Communities, a Peace Action offshoot that was
explicitly dedicating to shifting military funding to human needs. The
goal was to use Maryland’s forced weaning from the defense-industry teat
to bring a different set of economic priorities. The hope was to empanel
a diverse commission, including labor, nonprofits and activists as well
as the inevitable usual suspects from business and politics.

The bill in the 2014 session had [*solid
support*](http://dsadc.org/an-update-on-marylands-legislature/) from
progressive legislators and held its own in hearings, aided by testimony
from defense scholar Miriam Pemberton of the Institute for Policy
Studies and backed by a resolution from the state AFL-CIO citing
“growing need for programs of economic conversion.”

But the effort was [*hijacked, denatured and
derailed*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-legislature-showy-but-hard-on-workers-and-the-poor/)
by the fiat of the two Mikes, the leaders of the House (Speaker Mike
Busch) and Senate (President Mike Miller). Where the Maryland’s Future
commission would have been a diverse group including unions, peace and
justice organizations and other pro-worker and antimilitarist groups,
Busch and Miller unilaterally announced the creation of a “Maryland
Economic Development and Business Climate Commission” populated entirely
by representatives of the power structure in the state and chaired by
none other than the retired chairman of Lockheed Corp., Norman
Augustine. Both leaders called it the “Augustine Commission.” The
Futures Commission bill was withdrawn to clear the way for the
leadership’s stacked-deck commission.

The Assembly, despite muted howls of outrage from progressive members,
followed the leaders as well last year in dialing back the impact of the
state’s estate tax on the grounds that it would drive millionaires to
set their residence in some other, lower-tax haven and vanish from the
Free State’s tax rolls. That episode seemed a good indicator of the
direction of the new commission: protect power.

The commission was supposed to report in December 2014 but filed only an
interim report in February of this year, apparently because the two
Assembly leaders were so impressed with their work that they gave them
till September 2015 and – ominously – expanded their mandate to a
complete review of tax structure with “a comprehensive review of
Maryland’s State and local business-related taxes and tax incentives.”

The classic neoliberal trickle-down theory was in full play. In a cover
letter to the interim report, Augustine carefully noted that “The
prosperity of Maryland businesses will *in most instances* lead to the
creation of jobs for the State’s citizens.” (emphasis added). As a
leader of the entrenched culture of the development-first community, he
whined that it was the “entrenched culture” of the state’s executive
agencies that was upholding the state’s rep as unfriendly to business,
presumably because those state government workers were conscious of
having other constituents than just businessmen.

The interim report has enough in it to chill the blood and confirm that
the fix was in when this commission was first composed. As noted in the
*Washington Socialist* last year, [*the commission’s membership was
entirely conventional, largely elite and
business-friendly*](http://dsadc.org/maryland-legislative-roundup-mike-mike-kill-a-bill/).
 The one labor representative was a national AFL-CIO rep with expertise
in apprenticeship programs. The testimony the commission heard in eight
public hearings around the state came from a homogeneous business crowd.

There is a permanent war between organized business interests and the
state agency bureaucrats who regulate them that is very well represented
in the findings and recommendations of the commission. Most of those who
testified at the public hearings were business persons of various sorts;
there were few representatives of workers or consumers.

Still, the Augustine Commission’s report has tolerable recommendations,
in particular some that will be distinctly uncomfortable for Larry
Hogan, the new Republican governor. For one thing, it offers a ringing
call for not only restoration of the cuts Hogan has proposed for both
higher ed and K-12 schools but for increased funding. For another, the
proposals in aggregate all but specifically endorse industrial policy –
picking and supporting winners among the state’s existing and nascent
businesses and industries. The proposals for aligning the state’s
workforce with the needs of business and industry also show a strong
bias toward planning for future markets rather than just bending over
backwards for existing corporate powers – the section on apprenticeships
references the successful German model.

The several voices – likely those of members and of professional staff –
that emerge in the report show savvy staff work from the Legislative
Services division, which provides fact-based analysis that has always
kept the legislators as honest as they can be kept. The commission
members were essentially stacked in favor of the business community, and
Augustine’s cover letter to the interim (February) report and the
preamble to the report itself distill the complaints  of the businessmen
interviewed: Those state bureaucrats just don’t have the right attitude
toward promoting economic development; they are slow, they are too
cautious, they won’t allow “common-sense exceptions” to the regulations,
and they give Maryland its reputation as unfriendly to business. As the
introduction states, “Maryland’s primary economic vulnerability was
characterized by almost all of the executives who appeared before MEDBCC
to be an unfriendly, or at best indifferent, business environment.” But
what else might one expect from a stacked deck of testimony?

This complaint comes, incongruously, in the midst of a quite progressive
account of the nature of competition that leads off the report. It
suggests that attracting existing businesses into the state –
head-hunting at the corporate scale – is the “least attractive option”
and generally benefits the business being solicited rather than the
states engaged in the race to the bottom. The report also notes the new
economy’s “disconcerting” tendency to generate e-commerce capitalization
but not jobs, citing but not naming Instagram’s billion-dollar IPO
valuation with a mere 13 employees.

The competitiveness discussion shows other signs of staff input that
subverts the market-fundamentalist neoliberal overlay of the
commission’s charge: “The state must prioritize which industries it must
pursue to be competitive” and the crucial factor of research, which
“often will not be pursued without government intervention.” State
funding of technological development is recommended to rise
significantly as the state works its way out of its current budget hole.

There are, however, plenty of neoliberal ambushes embedded in the
overall report and its recommendations. For instance, a joint committee
of the legislature is proposed to gain authority to forestall any state
agency ruling that could have “meaningful” negative impact on small
businesses, throwing the decision to the governor. That could be a
barrier to future minimum wage increases, or to the earned sick leave
bill that is having its third hopeful incarnation during this session
after two failures. This year’s sick leave bill, HB 385, is said in the
fiscal note attached to have a “meaningful” small business impact. One
of the five bills filed for this session that are acknowledged to have
come directly from the recommendations of the Augustine Commission
establishes that tougher standard for regulations that have small
business impact via a commission “led by an advisory commission that
includes private sector stakeholders.” [*(SB 775/HB
939)*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frmMain.aspx?id=sb0775&stab=01&pid=billpage&tab=subject3&ys=2015RS)

Several other unpromising recommendations-turned-bills include
customer-training service for the allegedly rude and unsympathetic
regulatory employees of the state and the creation of a Secretary of
Commerce to oversee combined economic development agencies that, the
commission found, are disjointed and stovepiped. Among the potentially
helpful recommendations, a bill to pilot a German-style apprenticeship
program has skimpy House support ([*HB
942*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frmMain.aspx?pid=billpage&tab=subject3&id=hb0942&stab=01&ys=2015RS))
but a massive set of cosponsors in the Senate ([*SB
772*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frmMain.aspx?pid=billpage&tab=subject3&id=sb0772&stab=01&ys=2015RS)),
including many progressive stalwarts like Madaleno, Ramirez and Pinsky
(but not Manno or Raskin). A bill that might enhance the role of
university research (or become an intellectual-property Hoover) is
called a “task force to improve technology transfer from higher
education into the marketplace.” SB 941 and [*HB
773*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frmMain.aspx?id=sb0773&stab=01&pid=billpage&tab=subject3&ys=2015RS)
would investigate the possibility of explicitly bypassing ethics
requirements to speed up this process.

What’s missing in the report? The recommendations for boosting science
and technology research and business development are rife in the
commission’s plan for the future, but there is zero mention of the value
of alternative energy R&D or the “green jobs” that could be grown
through that – a remarkable omission since Maryland has during the
previous administration fused government action, private business
activity and sustained environmental activism toward those goals.

As for the commission’s extended mission – “examine the business tax and
incentive structure in Maryland,” as described by the two legislative
honchos in a Feb. 12 press release – working people and consumers will
always be on the losing end when only those aspects of the tax system
are under inspection.

The “Augustine Commission” report shows an uneven fealty to the kind of
market-fundamentalist view that the GOP governor, Hogan, appears to be
bringing to the fray (along with a distressing number of holdover
hard-liners from the Ehrlich administration). A good deal of the story
yet to be written will be framed by which among its recommendations make
it into law in this and future legislative sessions. The episodes so far
have a depressing familiarity: the trappings of deliberation are used to
make a *fait accompli* seem like a reason-based process. Progressives
can be happy, at least, that the Hogan-proposed education cuts that have
outraged both House and Senate get a clear repudiation from this report,
and that an activist approach to job generation and industrial policy is
cautiously endorsed. But overall, it’s another example of how the
capitalist agenda has a way of colonizing governance.

[*PEPCO-Exelon Deal Provides Focus to Feb. 15 General
Meeting*](http://dsadc.org/pepco-exelon-deal-provides-focus-to-feb-15-general-meeting/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2015**

*By Andy Feeney*

Thanks to unexpectedly cold weather, the scheduled general meeting of
the Metro DC chapter of DSA almost didn’t happen.  Our scheduled speaker
was Dave Freeman, aka the “Green Cowboy,” a former chairman of the
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and former manager of several large,
publicly owned electric utilities.  Freeman had expressed some eagerness
to talk to local democratic socialists about the history and the
potential future of publicly owned power systems in the United States,
but on the morning of Sunday, Feb. 15 he called us to say that he would
speak as scheduled if we preferred, but he thought attendance would be
sparse due to the single-digit weather, and he really thought we should
cancel the meeting.  He also confessed that at age 89, he was rather
reluctant to brave the cold weather himself.

After a somewhat frenzied consultation by phone, several members of the
local Steering Committee agreed we should cancel Freeman’s presentation,
but hold the meeting anyway to avoid disappointing any DSA members and
supporters who turned up for it.  At the last minute, we also persuaded
Marchant Wentworth, a green energy consultant and a former campaign
manager for the Union of Concerned Scientists, to speak on the proposed
merger of PEPCO into the Chicago-based utility generating utility
Exelon, as a substitute for Freeman’s presentation.

Despite a last-minute room shift upstairs in the Shaw library,  13
people found their way to the Feb. 15 meeting, including Wentworth, a
curious libertarian conservative and a representative of the climate
activist group 350.org in Loudoun County.  Attendees had a good
discussion of the proposed PEPCO-Exelon deal.  With DSA members Andy
Feeney and Woody Woodruff providing some backup, Wentworth led the
discussion of what the deal would mean for local utility ratepayers as
well as advocates for green and renewable energy.

Major points that emerged from the discussion mostly reflect those that
the *Washington Socialist* explored in two articles on the proposed
merger in our last issue, concerning recent hearings on the proposal
before [*the
D.C*](http://dsadc.org/dc-utility-watchdogs-ratepayers-climate-activists-unite-in-opposing-proposed-pepco-exelon-merger/).
and
[*Maryland*](http://dsadc.org/beneficiaries-line-up-to-praise-exelon-pepco-merger-ratepayers-not-so-much/)
public service commissions.  In addition, Wentworth made the point that
“takeover” really is a better description of the proposed deal than
“merger.”

If it gains local regulatory approval for the deal, Wentworth pointed
out, Exelon would acquire PEPCO by paying its stockholders a
significantly above-market price for its outstanding stock.  The
stockholders would obviously benefit, but to make a reasonable profit on
the deal, Exelon would then need to get additional revenue from
operating PEPCO’s existing distribution system.  The most logical way in
which it could get that added revenue would be through passing on the
relatively high costs of Exelon’s existing fleet of 23 nuclear power
plants to local ratepayers, at a significant premium above what the
average D.C. or suburban Maryland ratepayer is now paying for
electricity.

A fairly lively discussion of the takeover ensued, as well as of which
local ratepayers are likely to be most affected by it, as well as its
implications for local providers of what is called “distributed” power –
electricity generated by small businesses and homeowners from their own
solar panel or wind energy installations, which they can sell to PEPCO’s
existing distribution network when the sun is shining and the wind is
blowing, so as to reduce their overall power bills while contributing
renewable energy to the grid.

Exelon likes to boast that it operates some solar electric generation of
its own, but it is on record as opposing “distributed” power in a number
of states where it operates.  Its motivation for doing so is obvious,
since locally-produced distributed power competes with the power
generated from its large nuclear fleet, costing its stockholders money.

*Washington Socialist* readers interested in learning more about the
proposed takeover of PEPCO are encouraged to refer to our stories from
last issue for more details.  In Maryland, the deadline for public
comments on the proposed deal has passed, but the D.C. Public Service
Commission will continue accepting public comments to its docket on the
proposal up to March 26.  Written statements by D.C. residents may be
submitted by mail or in person to Brinda Westbrook-Sedgwick, Commission
Secretary, Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia, 1333 H
Street, N.W., Suite 200, West Tower, Washington DC 2005, or they can be
emailed to
[*PSC-CommissionSecretary@dc.gov*](mailto:PSC-CommissionSecretary@dc.gov),
or submitted through the Commission’s eDocket system at
[*http://www.depsc.org/edocket.asp*](http://www.depsc.org/edocket.asp).

The D.C. Office of People’s Counsel, which is charged with representing
utility customers in proposed rate cases, has issued an analysis stating
that the proposed PEPCO/Exelon merger is not in the public interest. 
For a look at the OPC’s statement, click here:
[*http://www.opc-dc.gov/index.php/consumer-topics-a-z/whats-hot/1090-opc-s-position-on-the-seven-public-interest-factors*](http://www.opc-dc.gov/index.php/consumer-topics-a-z/whats-hot/1090-opc-s-position-on-the-seven-public-interest-factors).

For a menu of different OPC documents concerning the propose merger,
click here: 
[*http://www.opc-dc.gov/index.php/consumer-topics-a-z/whats-hot/1043-learn-more-about-the-pepco-exelon-merger-proposal?highlight=WyJleGVsb24iLCJwZXBjbyIsImV4ZWxvbiBwZXBjbyJd*](http://www.opc-dc.gov/index.php/consumer-topics-a-z/whats-hot/1043-learn-more-about-the-pepco-exelon-merger-proposal?highlight=WyJleGVsb24iLCJwZXBjbyIsImV4ZWxvbiBwZXBjbyJd).

A national environmentalist perspective on this Exelon proposal is at
[*http://grist.org/climate-energy/the-exelon-pepco-merger-big-nuke-heavy-utility-looking-for-new-ratepayers-to-fleece/*](http://grist.org/climate-energy/the-exelon-pepco-merger-big-nuke-heavy-utility-looking-for-new-ratepayers-to-fleece/)

[*Remembering Michael
Harrington*](http://dsadc.org/remembering-michael-harrington/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

Maurice Isserman’s blog post on the Democratic Left blog site is at
[*http://www.dsausa.org/michael\_harrington\_remembered\_dl*](http://www.dsausa.org/michael_harrington_remembered_dl)

[*Two Streams Striving for Justice: Black Freedom, Women’s
Liberation*](http://dsadc.org/two-streams-striving-for-justice-black-freedom-womens-liberation/)

Sunday, March 1st, 2015

A Review of *Selma* and *She’s Beautiful When She’s Angry*

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2015**

*By Kurt Stand*

Apparent coincidences often speak to the spirit of the times — although
produced and screened based upon wholly disparate origins and schedules,
the current showings of *Selma* and *She’s Beautiful When She’s Angry*
each address a need of the moment to recapture a sense of the recent
past.  Much as activists within the civil rights and women’s movement in
the 1960s initially had little access to their rich histories, so today
many activists — let alone the broader public — have little concrete
knowledge or understanding of what the world looked and felt like to
those confronting oppressive conditions before today’s rights were won.
 And it is that lack of history that is so telling now, as what was
gained is being taken away.  Public discussion and understanding of how
social struggles developed, how activists were formed, how decisions on
strategy and tactics were made is critical to our ability not only to
defend existing rights but to expand and extend them.

Even though they are very different movies, each of these two films
meaningfully contributes to the possibility of such discussion.  *Selma*
follows a traditional story-telling arc; Martin Luther King Jr.’s
political and interpersonal struggles while organizing the 1965
Selma-to-Montgomery March become the lens through which the drive to
pass the Voting Rights Act is told.  The strength of the movie is that
the intersection of personality and movement makes history accessible in
a manner often lost; King is portrayed as heroic (which indeed he was),
but also as a part of a much wider movement with other heroic individual
leaders and grassroots militants — and therefore part of a movement
filled with many different and sometimes conflicting views and voices
which nonetheless acted in concert.  As in any such narrative, the
imperative of story-telling makes the picture of history neater, more
unilinear, than it was in reality; nonetheless, by showing meetings,
arguments, debates through which decisions were made, audiences are
given a more accurate picture of the past than works of history or
fiction that focus on an individual or leader in isolation (or in
opposition) to the social movements of their times.  That is even more
true of *She’s Beautiful When She’s Angry*, which documents the
emergence, growth and diversity of Second Wave feminism — roughly from
the early-1960s to the mid-1970s — through contemporary news footage and
present-day interviews with key participants in Boston, New York, the
Bay Area, Chicago, DC and elsewhere.  Both of the nature of the
documentary and the nature of the movement made any simple coherence
hard to achieve, except in the profound sense that the multiplicity of
leaders and locations and concerns was essential to the power and
meaning of the struggle by women for women’s rights.  The narrative arc
is the story as a whole and while it makes the film less immediately
graspable than what could be achieved through a plot-driven tale, it
provides a framework that allows a better sense of the inter-connection
between individual voices and collective action.

The focus of each film on the relationship between people within social
movements touches on a truth of how political change occurs — a truth
often ignored by Hollywood.   That lack makes highly ironic the
criticisms of *Selma* by some over the depiction of Lyndon Johnson’s
role in the voter registration movement.  Ironic given the almost
complete lack of historical validity of the vast majority of historical
films (such as in *Mississippi Burning*, turning truth upside down by
pretending that the FBI wanted to discover and prosecute those who
murdered civil rights workers, to cite but one of countless other
examples) which are not attacked in the press.  This it is not a
question of documentary accuracy — it is a fictional account and does
not pretend to be a footnoted work striving to get every detail right in
the correct chronological order.  Rather it is a film that strives to
speak to the underlying truth of King and of the civil rights movement,
of the poverty and violence, of the hope and vision, which inspired it.
 And thereby, *Selma* recaptures the anger at oppression and racism,
anger often lost in “feel good” depictions of the era.  So too, the
superficial picture of a struggle that moved from victory to victory
(Brown v. Bd. of Education, the March on Washington, the Civil Rights
Act, the Voting Rights Act), often ignores the sense of frustration as
each gain was met by a violent intransigence that still left African
Americans second-class citizens in their own country.   As to the
relationship between government and social movements, one need only note
that Johnson, when Senate Majority leader in the 1950s, blocked
meaningful civil rights legislation, legislation that he subsequently
signed into law.  It is to his credit that he did sign, but the change
was not solely a personal one; rather it was the work of leaders,
activists and organizations rooted in the black community that made the
difference.  If *Selma*, again because of the conventions of mainstream
movie-making, can’t completely bring the full dynamic of those
relationships on the ground to the surface, it nonetheless comes far
closer than most Hollywood movies, presenting a truer, more nuanced,
more relevant version of our collective past than what viewers are
ordinarily able to see on screen.

As noted, *She’s Beautiful When She’s Angry* presents multiple voices in
order to present a  history of a movement that brought such enormous
sweeping changes that it is difficult for people today to grasp  how
ingrained, pervasive and accepted blatant, overt sexism had been.
  Rather than focusing on one issue, group or leader, the film depicts
various layers of challenges to existing structures and relationships
manifested in all aspects of life.  The essence of the impact the
movement struck amongst women is shown in telling how a collective in
Boston wrote *Our Bodies, Our Selves* — seeking self-knowledge they
touched a chord amongst women across the country who, denied such
knowledge in school and by society, made that work their own (and, in an
inspiring segment of the movie, shows the influence it continues to have
as women around the world have made the book their own, in numerous
translations and rewritings).

The personal as political is shown not as a cliché but a necessity to
challenge an overt sexual double standard that pervaded family
relationships, job opportunities,  university life, and political
activism (even of the left).  Help wanted ads, to cite but one example,
were not only gender-specific — employers could all but ask for sexual
favors; therefore the political demand for the end of such
discrimination was a personal demand to have choice in life.  And, as to
choice, the film’s recounting of the massive underground network
providing safe places for women to have abortions in an era when such a
referral system — let alone the practice — was itself illegal connected
the intimate to collective action to demands for legal change.  That
connection was reinforced as the demand amongst Black and Puerto Rican
women for the right to birth control was equally a demand against what
was a widespread practice of forced sterilization.  The film thereby
depicts the distinctiveness within the women’s movement of movements
built by women also challenging the pervasive impact of racism and
colonialism in their lives.  Coming full circle to the challenge posed
earlier by women against sexism in the civil rights and anti-war
movements, within the New Left, *She’s Beautiful When She’s Angry*
depicts the demand by lesbians that their insights, experiences and
struggle against repression be brought out into the open not only within
society but also within the activist community.  Throughout, the
enormous creativity of individuals who found a voice within themselves
that otherwise would have been suppressed is shown, unique voices that
would have been silenced unless nurtured by collectives of mutual
support.

It was a creativity fueled too by an anger at the existence of such a
double standard and inequality that faced — and still faces — such deep
resistance when confronted.   And this ties back to *Selma*, the anger,
the near despair that made the determination to press forward all the
more remarkable.  Music (and poetry) within these two movies register in
equal measure pain and aspiration that were and are as much a part of
the journey as are meetings and demonstrations.  Victories were won
despite resistance from established power, although that power was able
to limit the scope of social gains, thus laying the groundwork for the
corporate and right-wing pushbacks against liberatory and egalitarian
social justice.

That returns us to Johnson’s legacy, for the inadequacy of LBJ’s
liberalism was demonstrated already in 1964 when he sought to maintain
Democratic Party unity by trying to force an unsatisfactory compromise
between civil rights activists and segregationists.  The “compromise”
prevented activists from building an interracial coalition of the poor
within the Democratic Party, while concessions to racism did not keep
the southern white establishment from moving en masse to the Republican
Party.  At the same time, his commitment to the war in Vietnam
undermined his commitment for civil rights and to the war on poverty; a
contradiction brought out in *Selma*.  Unable to contain the strains of
society brought about by demands for genuine equality, Johnson’s
presidency collapsed only a few years subsequent to the massive victory
he won in 1964, a failure which set the stage for the subsequent drift
toward a Democratic Party polity that has put  anti-poverty and
collective working-class social measures on the backburner.  This was to
have a corrosive impact on the black freedom movement – social equality
was not only a value in itself, it was also understood as a means to the
power that could address economic inequality that trapped millions of
African Americans in lives of want.  Therefore, the need to join the
Voting Rights Act to the Civil Rights Act (as noted in the film), and
the continued need to find an adequate framework through which to
exercise political power (beyond the scope of this film).

Nixon’s attempt to co-opt or placate social justice movements while
simultaneously acting to reinforce existing hierarchies and inequalities
was similarly unable to contain social activism but could forestall the
goals of equality.  The National Strike for Women’s Equality in 1970,
although not a centerpiece the way the Selma-to-Montgomery march is in
*Selma*, nonetheless forms a highwater moment in *She’s Beautiful When
She’s Angry*.  The successful march was followed by a number of
victories — perhaps the most significant of which was passage of a
national system of child care.  Nixon’s veto of that legislation marked
the beginning of the end of that progress (foreshadowing the subsequent
defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment).  The attempts to give lip service
to reform without allowing substantive change to go forward was a
contradiction, which, when combined with his attempt to “win” in
Vietnam, led to the collapse on Nixon’s presidency shortly after his
massive victory in 1972.  Nixon’s policies, however, came to redefine
the shape of Republican Party practices that took full form under Ronald
Reagan; the onset of a reaction in all phases of US life. The political
system stabilized by squeezing out hope of change through political
action, though in the process we have been led from one social and
economic crisis after another.  The systemic attack on abortion rights —
on the right to choice — in subsequent years was part of a general
suppression of rights, of a general rise of insecurity, that have once
again placed greater burdens on women. Gender inequality has been on the
rise as both economic and social justice recede.

And so the struggle continues — when *She’s Beautiful When She’s Angry*
makes that explicit through references to women today fighting back
against attacks on abortion rights, organizing for workplace rights
amongst the most exploited, demonstrating against sexual violence
through “slut walks,” fighting for equal rights in every meaning of the
term.  *Selma*, in turn, is being shown at a time when the Supreme
Court’s gutting of key provisions of the Voting Rights Act has opened
the door to new and ever-more cynical forms of voter suppression.  A
song about Ferguson in the background as the film closes ties back to
the devaluation of black lives remembered on screen in the opening,
showing the death of four girls in a Birmingham, Alabama church bombing.
 “Black Lives Matter” has added meaning when thought is given to the
murder of black and white civil rights activists during the Selma
organizing, to the assassination of black leaders from Malcolm X to
Martin Luther King.

The present is not the past, of course; changes made were genuine and
meaningful even if limited.  The partial gains registered then and under
attack now sometimes cloud issues in the present which are often not as
clearcut as in the years portrayed by these two movies.  Reversing the
content of the personal as political, social and economic suffering is
now often seen and felt as a result of individual failure rather than as
a consequence of structures designed to maintain hierarchies of
inequality.  Thus, as one younger woman put the matter, oppression has
become more insidious.  A new way forward will have to be found, a
search that can only be helped by paying attention to what came before. 
Demands for equality in every phase of life are part and parcel of
demands for economic justice — and if these are pulled asunder, then all
suffer.  Freedom, liberation, dignity, self-determination, define the
dreams behind the struggles of the 1960s and 70s, in the striving for
rights as individuals that could — and can — only be gained through
structural change in our political and economic system.  Organizing
therefore ought to accommodate a multitude of concerns while also
seeking the common interest embodied in universal programs.   Contrary
to the neo-liberal zeitgeist, social and individual rights, social and
economic equality, are intertwined (an intertwining that is at the heart
of the socialist project, as it is at the heart of all social justice
activism).  The legacy of the past that speaks most forcefully to our
needs for the present is the need to coalesce multiple voices and
struggles that push that connection in every sphere of life – and is the
reason *Selma* and *She’s Beautiful When She is Angry* should be seen
and discussed.
