***The Washington Socialist***

**Articles from March 2016 Issue**

**Archived October 2016**

**Editor: Woody Woodruff**

[*Welcome to the March 2016 issue of The Washington
Socialist*](http://dsadc.org/welcome-to-the-march-2016-issue-of-the-washington-socialist/)

Wednesday, March 2nd, 2016

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="0.78125in"}

**Welcome to the March 2016 issue of the *Washington Socialist*, the
free monthly email newsletter of the Metro DC local of Democratic
Socialists of America.**

Black History Month was a day longer than usual, leap year etc., but
there was more to it than that.

Perhaps it’s in part due to the election year, but Black History Month
did not seem like a bell rung in an empty warehouse this year… huge
levels of discussion on racism and its attributes had been going on for
many months and Black History Month seemed… well, gee… normal. Just
another month in a continuum of heightened conversation on those topics.
When Black History Month is not special, does that mean something good
is going on, or something not so good? Have to think about this.

**MARCH FOR BERNIE DRAWS LARGE CROWD**

DSAers were highly visible at a march for Bernie in DC Feb. 27.

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="1.9791666666666667in"
height="1.1145833333333333in"}![](media/image3.jpeg){width="1.9791666666666667in"
height="1.4791666666666667in"}

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="1.9791666666666667in"
height="1.1145833333333333in"}![](media/image5.jpeg){width="1.1145833333333333in"
height="1.9791666666666667in"}

**NEWS: *DC LABOR MIXES CHANGE AND CONTINUITY***\
The long tenure of Jos Williams at the helm of the DC Central Labor
Council is punctuated by his retirement this spring and a significant
alteration of the way the Council operates. Jackie Jeter, the president
of Amalgamated Transit Union in the metro area, is nominated as the
president of the CLC and the Council just hired an executive director,
Carlos Jimenez, who is a friend and ally from the Jobs with Justice
field staff.  Two DSA members are nominated to the executive committee.
The election will be held at the March 21 Council meeting.

**EVENTS**\
**Metro DC DSA Membership Meeting is Sunday, March 13** 2:30 p.m. at the
Watha T. Daniel Shaw Library, 1630 7^th^ St. NW right across the street
from the Shaw/Howard Metrorail station on the Green/Yellow lines. The
speaker is Zach Weinstein from Public Interest Research Group (PIRG),
discussing the DC Fair Election Coalition, whose mission is “to pass
meaningful campaign finance reform in D.C.”

**Metro DC DSA’s Socialist Salon is Thursday, March 17** 6:30 p.m. at
Hunan Dynasty, 215 Pennsylvania Ave SE. A program on reproductive rights
is in formation.\
***Get the latest updates on our activities at our*** [****Meetup
page****](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=a44ac0084c&e=003de9ccab)
***anytime.***

**WORKSHOPS, ANALYSIS MARCH 12 AIM TO SOLIDIFY SANDERS MOMENTUM**\
The battle for the Democratic Party nomination, once considered a
walkover for Hillary Clinton, has remarkably turned into a race too
close to call: [*the latest
polls*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8a1725c80b&e=003de9ccab)
show Sanders just about edging Clinton nationally, such has been his
rise in recent months. We’ve never before come this close to electing a
socialist president, and win or lose we must learn all we can from it.\
But could a President Sanders, as progressive as his program would be,
possibly survive the inevitable right-wing onslaught not only from a
Republican-controlled Congress but also from [*within the ranks of his
own
party*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=8734900091&e=003de9ccab)?
Or can we expect an internal rebellion among the Democrats, much like in
[*Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour Party in the
UK*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=5839dc8f75&e=003de9ccab)?

And, perhaps more importantly, what happens to his political revolution
if he fails to get elected?  *How can we organize ourselves to keep
Bernie’s program alive, regardless of who’s sitting in the White House?*

**Together with People for Bernie, Metro DC DSA will be hosting a series
of hands-on workshops on Saturday, March 12, focusing on how we can
tackle these tricky questions after the election.**

Brooks Sunkett, Communications Workers of America Vice President for
Public, Healthcare, and Education Workers, will make the opening
address, while Harold Meyerson, *The American Prospect* editor-at-large
and DSA Vice-Chair, will deliver a keynote speech looking into how our
current political climate came to be.

We invite all of you to join us at the headquarters of Communication
Workers of America (501 3rd St. NW, Washington, DC, 20001), close to
Judiciary Square metro station. [*The event will run from 10 a.m. to 2
p.m*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=f8919e2fe2&e=003de9ccab).,
and we’ll be discussing how to build a nationwide left-wing movement to
confront the right, from the federal level right down to the
neighborhood level, by supporting progressive legislation and bringing
local progressives to power.

Stop by to learn how we and other activist groups can help Bernie
Sanders turn his election manifesto into a real grassroots political
revolution!\
— *Ming Chun Tang*

**The Future We Want: Radical Ideas for the New Century March 14**\
A Colloquy at Busboys and Poets (5^th^ and K) Monday, March 14 at 6:30
p.m. featuring DSA member and *Nation* senior editor Sarah Leonard and
DSA Vice-chair and *Jacobin* founder/editor Bhaskar Sunkara. The two are
editors of the just-published *The Future We Want*, a collection of
essays by young progressives drawing on what the editors describe as the
country’s “rich tradition of socialist proposals.” Busboys and Poets 5th
& K –1025 5th Street NW Washington, DC 20001

**COMING UP SOON**: National DSA has signed on as a co-sponsor of
**Democracy Spring**, a complex action approximately April 2-16 that
will include a march from Philadelphia to Washington D.C. beginning
April 2 and actions in the capital April 11-16  that include mass civil
disobedience with a potential for arrests.

Major themes include reversing the effect of big money in political
democracy and voter suppression.

Organizers are invoking the Occupy movement and Selma as similarly
seismic events to the one planned.

A ten-day march from Philadelphia to Washington begins April 2. The
action demands that Congress pass the “perfectly viable reform bills now
pending before it.” Failing Congressional action, Democracy Spring aims
to “reclaim the People’s House in mass nonviolent sit-ins” planned to
last five days, the call to action says.

The major focus will be on getting big money out of politics and
restoration of Voting Rights Act elements that would reverse
voter-suppression efforts impacting poor and minority voters, both high
priorities for DSA.

**IN THIS ISSUE — MOSTLY CLOSE TO HOME**\
Socialist Feminism, a complex and evolving subject, was the substance of
a discussion at the Socialist Salon in February, led by Carolyn Byerly.
Rose Driscoll recounts Byerly’s talk and the subsequent discussion, with
context and her analysis. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=0d2c808be6&e=003de9ccab)

The turmoil and gridlock at the Supreme Court following the death of
Justice Antonin Scalia has had several benefits, not least the stall-out
of a dangerous right-wing attack on public unions. Kurt Stand reports on
a talk by ATU organizer Chris Townsend on the state of unions and
prospects for improvement if workers take up the fight for themselves.
[*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=d991fa1d12&e=003de9ccab)

The vulnerability of the District’s shaky Home Rule status to becoming a
plaything for Congressional power trips is made even more so in a
presidential election year. Will any of the potential candidates go to
the wall for the rights of citizens in the Last Colony? Bill Mosley has
a gloomy account – with one exception. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6f6a842620&e=003de9ccab)

One of the toughest local labor struggles features a public agency that
privatizes that part of its service afforded to the most vulnerable
citizens, putting its unionized employees behind the eight-ball from
several different directions. Yes, we’re talking about MetroAccess. A
recent meeting in Prince George’s mapped a fightback scenario joining
riders and drivers, Woody Woodruff reports. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=26e4643856&e=003de9ccab)

Five parcels of land near the Congress Heights Metrorail station are
caught in a conflict between developer greed (and underhanded behavior)
and the rights of low-income tenants. Whose side is the city – which has
some control over the process — taking here? Andy Feeney describes the
state of play, which may be susceptible to citizen pressure for a
positive outcome. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=1da7c6f5ed&e=003de9ccab)

Farther from home – in Annapolis, in fact – the fate of a statewide paid
sick leave law is still shaky despite assurances from politicians that
this is its year. Crucial hearings in the two committees that have
killed the bill three years running are coming up the first week in
March, Woody Woodruff reports, and advocates are raising the volume.
[*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=776383781d&e=003de9ccab).

*BOOKS/ARTS/GOOD READS*\
The successes and final failure of communism in Bulgaria during and
after World War II is the subject of a fine-grained history, *The Left
Side of History*. Lynne Williamson reviews this personal,
family-centered work. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=6b307675c3&e=003de9ccab)

Kurt Stand reviews Lynn Nottage’s “Sweat,” a play presented at the Arena
Theater detailing the tangled class, race and personal relations of
characters who live through the death of a working-class town in the age
of NAFTA. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=20ce0a5b5d&e=003de9ccab)

This month’s “Good Reads” is extra substantial, with curated reading
suggestions from Kurt Stand and Andy Feeney as well as the basic
recommended reading list for emerging socialists from members of DSA’s
National Political Committee. Plus the usual grab bag. [*Read complete
article*](http://meetup.us5.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=9a5b7e0502&e=003de9ccab)

Y**ou can read these and other past articles in the *Washington
Socialist* on our website where they are archived,**
[***dsadc.org***](http://meetup.us5.list-manage1.com/track/click?u=bee696bf6b36570e5c2c2e83c&id=307b4c94aa&e=003de9ccab)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\
**Our readers are our best writers**. Join that group and submit an
article about activism you are doing or someone else is doing; reviews
of important books you have read; think-pieces contributing to the
left’s perennial search for a better way to explain our crisis to its
victims. ***You are part of this conversation. Submit contributions to
*The Washington Socialist* at a number of levels — send us nominee for
“Good Reads” (they should be available online so send links); send news
and notices of activism; submit articles. Send to***
[*woodlanham@gmail.com*](mailto:woodlanham@gmail.com).

[*Congress Heights Gentrification Fight: With Diverse Allies, Could
Tenants Win This
One?*](http://dsadc.org/congress-heights-gentrification-fight-with-diverse-allies-could-tenants-win-this-one/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist &lt;&gt;* March 2016**

*By Andy Feeney*

For a generation, the rapid and ongoing redevelopment of the Washington
area real estate market has unleashed forces for gentrification on a
massive scale; and for a generation, advocates for the preservation of
low-income housing, especially among low-income communities of color,
have often been overwhelmed by well-funded and politically connected
developers.

In one local battle centering around the Congress Heights Metro stop in
Southeast D.C., however, a diverse and somewhat surprising coalition of
gentrification opponents seems to be coming together in a fashion that
could help a small community of low-income tenants hold onto their
housing, while perhaps frustrating the development plans of an
increasingly unpopular development partnership with apparent political
ties to Mayor Muriel Bowser.

For several years now, D.C. developer Geoffrey Griffis of City Partners
LLC, in coalition with   Bethesda-based property company Sanford
Capital, has been planning to redevelop five properties near the
Congress Heights Metro station into an upscale, multi-use project that
would include a 285,000-square-foot office building, about 20,000 square
feet of retail space and 208 apartment units. Before his death several
years ago, former Mayor Marion Barry praised the proposed redevelopment
as essential to the economic revitalization of this part of Southeast
Washington, and an early *City Paper* article on the plan suggested that
at first glance, its potential effects seemed to be positive.

In order to build the new 442,000-square-foot complex, though, City
Partners and Sanford Capital are planning to demolish four existing
rent-controlled apartment buildings housing low-income and mostly
elderly tenants. Under DC’s Tenants Option to Purchase Act (TOPA), the
tenants, upon official notice of the demolitions, would have a legal
right to offer to purchase their units as an alternative to being
evicted.

To prevent them from doing so, tenants and low-income housing advocates
say, Sanford Capital has sought to push people into moving out, both by
offering them financial assistance in relocating and by allowing the
buildings to deteriorate to the point where the tenants face virtually
unbearable conditions.

City inspectors and tenants have discovered furnaces and air
conditioners that don’t work; leaking plumbing; infestations of mice,
rats and bedbugs in some of the buildings; broken doors and broken locks
that have enabled squatters and drug users to invade the buildings;
falling ceilings in some units; peeling paint; and accumulations of
sewage in some of the basements so that buildings are pervaded by
disgusting odors.

Perhaps in response to these tactics, a majority of the 47 apartments in
the four buildings are now vacant, but a stubborn 19 tenants remain and
have formed an Alabama Ave./13^th^ Street Tenants Coalition to fight
Sanford Capital for their right to exercise their TOPA rights to
purchase if and when the buildings are redeveloped.

Attorney Will Merrifield of the Washington Legal Clinic for the Homeless
has represented the tenants in their fight; also taking up their cause
is local community activist Eugene Puryear, whom Metro DC DSA endorsed
in 2014 in his campaign as the Statehood Green Party nominee for an
at-large seat on the D.C. Council. Through a new organization called
Justice First, Puryear has organized protests at the homes of developer
Geoff Griffis and at the home of one of the principals of Sanford
Capital.

Also taking up the cause of the tenants are D.C. Council Chairman Phil
Mendelson and D.C. Councilmember Anita Bonds, chair of the Council’s
Committee on Housing and Community Development, who on Feb. 4 held a
joint hearing of Bonds’ committee and the Committee of the Whole to hear
testimony about conditions at the Congress Heights properties.

Also in February, D.C. Attorney General Karl Racine sued several
individuals and entities associated with the properties in Superior
Court, citing Sanford Capital’s repeated violations of city housing and
health regulations at the property and requesting that the court appoint
a receiver to take over the properties temporarily and correct the
violations at Sanford’s expense.

Also voicing support for the tenants and demanding correction of the
housing violations is Councilmember Elissa Silverman, who attended the
Feb. 4 hearing along with Ward 8 Councilmember LaRuby May, who
represents Congress Heights. Among other things, Councilmember May
declared at the hearing that the D.C. Council would never permit white
residents of the District to spend years enduring the same conditions
that low-income black residents have had to experience at Congress
Heights.

However, *Washington Post* reporter Abigail Hauslohner has reported that
two close allies of Mayor Bowser who have been involved in a fifth
property important to the proposed redevelopment project, Southeast
businessman Phinis Jones and his business partner Monica Ray, have
political ties to Councilmember May. In the view of some Congress
Heights residents and some observers of the controversy, these ties make
May’s true position on the redevelopment plan somewhat ambiguous.

The fifth property mentioned, at 3200 13^th^ Street SE, is currently
under the effective control of the D.C. Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD), since its previous owner essentially
defaulted on a \$900,000 loan from the city and owes large sums in back
taxes as well.

If DHCD chooses to forgive the unpaid loan and back taxes, the *Post*
reports, the property will come under the control of an organization
essentially controlled by Jones and Ray, the Congress Heights Community
Training and Development Corporation. In that case, low-income housing
advocates believe Jones and Ray would help the proposed upscale
redevelopment go forward.

If DHCD chooses not to forgive the loan, however, it could take
ownership of the property itself and then use its leverage to pressure
Griffis and Sanford Capital into reshaping their proposed development to
make it more amenable to the existing tenants. Mayor Bowser’s office
presumably can have a great influence on which course DHCD will pursue.

However, Bowser’s campaign for mayor in 2014 received campaign donations
of roughly \$3,000 from Griffis and his family as well as \$3,700 from
Patrick Strauss, a principal of Sanford Capital, and his family. Critics
of the mayor suggest that this may bias her in favor of the development,
which in any case fits in with her larger plans for the redevelopment of
Southeast D.C., including the old St. Elizabeth’s Hospital campus not
far from Congress Heights.

The Post also notes that in 2015, the mayor appointed Griffis, who calls
himself an old family friend, to a position on the National Capital
Planning Commission. Whether Ms. Bowser is now likely to direct the DHCD
to impose new conditions on the Congress Heights development therefore
appears questionable.

Nevertheless, Will Merrifield of the Washington Clinic for the Homeless,
in an interview with the *Washington Socialist*, said that one thing
progressives in the region can do to help the embattled Congress Heights
tenants is to contact Mayor Bowser’s office and urge her to have DHCD
support their cause.

“A simple thing people could do is to call the mayor’s office and tell
her to stand with the tenants of Congress Heights and partner with them
once they get their TOPA notices, to create affordable housing on top of
the Congress Heights Metro,” Merrifield said. “I don’t think it’s ever
bad for the mayor to hear from the community and to know that people are
concerned about this. I think all pressure is good pressure.”

In addition, Merrifield noted, the attorney general’s lawsuit against
Sanford Capital and its associated entities requesting that its
properties be put in receivership is another source of pressure on the
developers. A third source of pressure is the campaign Puryear has been
organizing through Justice First.

Yet a fourth source of pressure is a lawsuit that the tenants have filed
against Sanford Capital in the city’s Office of Administrative Hearings
asking for a rent rollback for tenants who’ve had to live in Sanford’s
neglected buildings and endure the conditions there. On that lawsuit,
Merrifield said, he is serving as co-counsel along with pro bono lawyers
from Arnold & Porter, one of Washington’s more powerful corporate law
firms.

What Merrifield suggests that the District Government should support, as
an alternative to the virtual giveaways of valuable land to private
developers who build expensive housing and upscale business developments
on it, is a commitment to helping low-income tenants to own and control
their own housing through housing cooperatives, with the city perhaps
establishing an Office of Cooperatives to help people to create and
operate such cooperatives well.

At the least, Merrifield said in the interview, “The city needs to make
available land for true affordable housing development and make a
commitment to developing such affordable housing, rather than just
giving away land to giant redevelopment projects like the Wharf, which
distort land values around them and in this way destabilize entire
communities.” The District Government has plenty of money in its budget
to house people, Merrifield added, and can easily find tens of millions
of dollars to invest in sports stadiums. “To me, it’s just a matter of
will.”

*Washington Socialist* readers who wish to contact Mayor Bowser can do
so by calling her office at 202-727-2643. For a look at what the
Washington Legal Clinic for the Homeless is saying and doing about
Congress Heights, go to
[*http://www.legalclinic.org/broad-implications-for-dcs-affordable-housing-crisis-at-hearing-on-congress-heights/*](http://www.legalclinic.org/broad-implications-for-dcs-affordable-housing-crisis-at-hearing-on-congress-heights/)
.

Readers who want to oppose Sanford Capital’s management of the Congress
Heights properties may also choose to join in a protest demonstration
that Puryear of Justice First and tenants of the properties have
scheduled at the Congress Heights buildings for Wednesday, March 9.

Puryear is calling for a “big turnout so the District, slumlords and
developers know we mean business. We need everyone who believes the
District shouldn’t help slumlords or displace low-income Black residents
to come out.” According to an online press release from Justice First,
attendees at the March 9 demonstration should gather at the Congress
Heights Metro stop on the Green Line beginning at 7 p.m. For more
details, check Justice First’s web site at
[*http://justicefirst.nationbuilder.com/support\_congress\_heights\_residents*](http://justicefirst.nationbuilder.com/support_congress_heights_residents)
.

This article attempts to provide a simplified overview of some
complicated political and economic issues surrounding redevelopment at
Congress Heights. The *Washington Socialist* hopes to return to this
topic in future issues as we continue to explore gentrification in the
Metro DC area.

[*DC HOME RULE: WHAT’S THE POSITION OF THE PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES?*](http://dsadc.org/dc-home-rule-whats-the-position-of-the-presidential-candidates/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2016**

*By Bill Mosley*

With all of the issues being juggled by this year’s crop of presidential
candidates – terrorism, immigration, the economy, which device Hillary
Clinton used to send emails – one seldom heard is what they will do to
either give the District of Columbia more autonomy from federal rule or
take some of what autonomy DC already has away.

It’s no wonder that DC’s status has been a non-issue on the campaign
trail: Most Americans consider it to be of very little consequence
except the 670,000 District residents who, unlike the citizens of the 50
states, are subject to congressional control over their laws and budgets
and have no voting representation in Congress. This frequently has
brought the District – with its overwhelmingly Democratic voter base and
its majority-minority population – into the crosshairs of Republicans in
Congress, who are all too eager to beat up on DC for enacting
progressive legislation that the GOP opposes. Instances of congressional
meddling in the District are legion, but the most egregious examples
include the following:

-   For nearly a decade, Congress prohibited DC from using its own funds
    to conduct a needle-exchange program to prevent HIV transmission,
    leading to rates of HIV and AIDS in the District that were the
    highest in the country. The lifting of the ban in 2007 led to a
    [*dramatic drop in new
    HIV infections.*](http://wamu.org/programs/metro_connection/15/09/25/dc_needle_exchange)

-   In 1998, DC approved a voter initiative to allow marijuana to be
    used for medical purposes, but Congress forbade the District from
    even counting the vote for a year (it passed with overwhelming
    voter support) and then blocked DC from implementing medical
    marijuana for more than a decade.

-   In 2011, to avoid a shutdown of the DC government, Congress – with
    the assent of President Obama – banned DC from using its own
    revenues to fund abortions for low-income women.

In a 1980 referendum, DC voters chose to make the District the 51^st^
U.S. state, which would eliminate congressional interference in local
matters once and for all. Now, 36 years later, not only has DC not
achieved statehood; it has had to continually defend the limited home
rule it achieved in 1974. In 1997, Congress even stripped the District
government of virtually all its powers, and for several years DC was run
by a congressionally appointed control board.

The failure to make DC statehood – and even defense of limited local
democracy – a national issue has not been for lack of trying by DC
officials, principally nonvoting House Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton as
well as the District’s elected “shadow” senators and representatives
(whose job is lobbying Congress for statehood) and citizen organizations
such as the Stand Up! for Democracy in DC Coalition, DC Vote and
Neighbors United for DC Statehood. Clearly, more work needs to be done
to engage DC residents in the statehood movement, to say nothing of the
rest of the country,

Nevertheless, all of the candidates have weighed in on DC’s status at
various times, often when asked by local journalists or elected
officials. Most of those who have served in either house of Congress
have voting records on DC statehood or home-rule matters.

It will surprise no one that DC would fare much worse under any of the
current crop of Republican candidates than with the Democrats.
Statehood, especially, is a nonstarter for most Republicans, as this
would mean one more certain vote for Democrats in the House and two in
the Senate. From time to time, moderate Republicans have been open to
measures short of statehood, such as a single vote for DC in the House
of Representatives or more local control over the budget. But GOP
support for even these limited reforms has been mostly missing lately.

Believe it or not, the one Republican candidate still in the race who
has not completely shut the door on statehood is Donald Trump. In an
interview last August on NBC’s *Meet the Press*, Trump responded to host
Chuck Todd’s question about his views on DC statehood by first plugging
his new hotel in the former Old Post Office building, and adding:

*I would like to do whatever is good for the District of Columbia
because I love the people. You know, it’s funny. I’ve really gotten to
know the people, the representatives, and the mayor, and everybody.
They’re really special people. They’re great. And they have a great
feeling. So I would say whatever’s best for them I’m for. *

That’s more of a non-answer than anything. But compare that to the rest
of the surviving Republican field, [*whose attitudes were compiled by DC
Vote*](https://www.dcvote.org/blog/where-do-current-presidential-candidates-stand-dc-equality):

-   Ted Cruz – Of all the Republicans in the field, Cruz has been DC’s
    most active antagonist. During the current session of Congress, Cruz
    has introduced bills to repeal DC laws banning workplace
    discrimination and protecting the rights of LGBTQ students. He also
    introduced a measure to force the District to spend locally raised
    funds to provide vouchers for students to attend private schools.

-   Marco Rubio – Rubio has no qualms about bashing the District to
    score points with his conservative supporters. Last year he
    introduced a bill that would have repealed virtually all of DC’s
    restrictions on guns.

-   Ben Carson – After winning a straw poll of DC Republicans last
    summer, Carson said: “There are a lot of things that D.C. doesn’t
    have when it comes to infrastructure. For example, D.C. doesn’t have
    an agriculture infrastructure and that could be a real problem when
    it involves being a state. People who support D.C. statehood need to
    think long and hard about things like that. Perhaps it would be
    better if the District could have voting representation in Maryland
    or Virginia.” That reflects the views of many DC Republicans; the
    local party has supported voting representation in Congress but has
    never fully embraced statehood.

-   John Kasich – While a member of the House, Kasich opposed statehood
    when it came up for a vote in 1993.

As for the Democrats, Hillary Clinton has been even more coy about her
views on statehood than even Bill Clinton or Barack Obama, both of whom
gave ringing rhetorical endorsements to statehood but declined to do
anything more to bring it about. While a member of the Senate, she
supported an unsuccessful bill to give the District a single vote in the
House – a bill many local democracy advocates vehemently opposed,
considering it a poor substitute for full statehood. When it comes to
making a public statement about statehood she has been silent, although
she expressed her support for statehood in a private conversation with
Eleanor Holmes Norton, according to a [*Norton press
release*](https://norton.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/norton-gets-clinton-s-personal-support-for-dc-statehood).
If whispering soothing words in our delegate’s ear is as far as she is
willing to go, we can guarantee that a Hillary Clinton administration is
not going to drive statehood to victory.

This leaves Bernie Sanders. Of all the candidates he is the only one to
have consistently, firmly backed statehood for decades – going back to
1993 when he voted for statehood as a member of the House representing
Vermont. In 1993, during the House debate over the statehood bill,
[*Sanders made this statement on the House
floor*](http://www.c-span.org/video/?c4552649/bernie-sanders-dc-statehood):

*How could I in good conscience say that it is appropriate for Vermont
to have two seats in the Senate, which is does, to have a Congressman
who can vote on all the issues, which we do, to have a governor and a
state legislature which deals with all of the problems facing our
people, which we do, and then say that the people of the District of
Columbia, with a population larger than Vermont and larger than some
other states, should not be able to enjoy the same rights?*

Sanders’ views have not wavered since that time, reflected in his
becoming a sponsor of the New Columbia Admissions Act, the statehood
bill currently before Congress.

DC Democrats who regard achieving statehood as a top priority will have
a clear choice in the June 14 primary. Those who are willing to put DC’s
fate in the hands of the Democratic hierarchy might be content with
Hillary Clinton as the nominee. For those who want our President to be a
true champion of statehood, only Sanders fits the bill.

[*Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association: A Respite Not a
Victory*](http://dsadc.org/friedrichs-v-california-teachers-association-a-respite-not-a-victory/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2016**

*By Kurt Stand*

Public sector unions – and the US labor movement as a whole — dodged a
bullet when Supreme Court Justice Anthony Scalia died in the midst of
hearing Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association, for there is
little doubt that his vote would have been decisive in breaking a 4-4
tie in the case. A decision, had it been made, would have undercut the
ability of public sector unions to collect fees for the workers whom
they represent. But unionists should take little comfort from that, for
it is only a bit of breathing space – the anti-labor offensive will not
go away. Speaking at the February 14 DSA membership meeting, Chris
Townsend, Director of Field Operations for the Amalgamated Transit Union
(and formerly United Electrical Workers political director), argued that
rather than hope for good court rulings, labor needs to aggressively
organize its members and act with political independence on behalf of
working class interests.

***The Legal Dispute***

Although the specific battle in Friedrichs is over, it is important to
remember what it is about for the issues at stake will come up again and
again. Rebecca Friedrichs, nine other school teachers and the Christian
Educators Association claimed that the California Teachers Association
violated their First Amendment rights by requiring non-union members to
affirmatively opt out of paying the full agency fee for union
representation. A description like that, of course, makes the matter
seem arcane and too technical to have far-reaching meaning; moreover, it
can seem like a legitimate request – after all, why should non-union
members have to pay anything to a union? But behind the verbal games is
a simple fact: Unions are legally required to represent all workers
within a bargaining unit, whether or not they are members. If the
California Teachers Association negotiates a pay raise, or an improved
pension, or a smaller class size or an extra holiday, Friedrichs would
accrue that benefit even though she never joined the union. And if she
was unfairly transferred or assigned an extra time slot, or harassed by
a principal, she could file a grievance through her shop steward.
Moreover, if she felt that the union did not sufficiently fight for her
at a hearing, she could sue the union for failing its obligation to
provide fair representation – again, even though not a union member (and
that is not a hypothetical, it happens – for some individuals hypocrisy
will trump solidarity every time).

Such a restriction is unique to unions; government does not hold any
other kind of organization – non-profits, churches, publicly traded
businesses – to such a standard (one of many forms of unfair and
disparate treatment to which federal law subjects organized labor, as
Townsend pointed out). Moreover, the logic of Friedrichs had other
implications, for behind it lies an effort to narrow the range of issues
public employee unions can address almost to the point of vanishing.
Federal workers, as we know in the DC metro area cannot bargain over
wages, although they can advocate for members. But such advocacy can be
considered “political,” as can virtually every measure any federal,
state, even municipal public union advances; after all, every such
measure impacts on the “public” or “taxpayers” – and so the effort to
undermine union dues collection falls in line with the effort to
undercut union bargaining rights, union political activity.

***In the Background***

Public employee unions are now under attack by corporate interests for
the simple reason that they are the strongest section of the labor
movement given the success of preceding decades’ attacks on private
sector unions. The Friedrich’s case did not emerge because a few
disgruntled teachers decided to go to court. Rather the lawsuit was
developed, promoted, bought and paid for by the Center for Individual
Rights, a right-wing think tank funded by the Koch Brothers, the Lynde
and Harry Bradley Foundation, the Scaife Foundation and other funds
dedicated to the destruction of social rights – thus the CIR has not
only targeted unions, it has also fought against voting rights,
affirmative action, protections for LGBTQ people, and remedies for
violence against women. Townsend noted Jane Mayer’s **Dark Money** – a
book about the Koch Brothers, their roots in the John Birch society, and
their connection with other wealthy industrialists – as providing a
glimpse of the forces arrayed against working people. He noted too, that
the class dimension of the business struggle against organized labor –
of which Friedrichs is only the most recent instance – can be seen in
the role of General Electric, a company that has had a representative
sit in every White House Administration, Democratic and Republican,
since the 1920s.

One of the myths used to build opposition to unionism is by exaggerating
labor’s strength, a myth used today in the assault on public employee
organization. For they do not have anywhere near the power attributed to
them – many states deny them bargaining rights altogether, some of the
most egregious instances evident in Virginia. Townsend used that state
to make a further point; most unions have become so timid and so
bureaucratic they fail to resist such attacks – so unions supported
Democrat Terry McAuliffe for Virginia governor without even asking him
to consider changing anti-union state laws, laws initially proposed by
labor-backed Democratic governor Doug Wilder. That failure to make
demands on candidates is currently on display in this year’s
presidential campaign, many unions have endorsed Hillary Clinton despite
her past support for NAFTA and other free trade deals, despite her
current refusal to support a \$15 minimum wage. More to the point,
Townsend stressed, those unions supporting Clinton, have not asked for
anything in return. Access is what they want, but access by itself will
do nothing to enable unions to organize or to gain the power right-wing
opponent claim they have.

***Organizing Resistance***

Which returned him to his first point; it is an anomaly — and an aspect
of the successful effort by property-owners to limit popular democracy
with the writing of the Constitution –that Supreme Court justices have
so much power. But such power can only be contested by an engaged labor
movement that fights back, that continues to organize at workplaces to
resist corporate power and to build workers’ collective strength. And
that same approach, Townsend stressed ought to apply to presidential and
congressional elections — which should not be fought over the pick of a
judge, but rather ought to be seen as a means of electing people to
office who will proactively legislate on behalf of working people. And
this is where Bernie Sanders’ campaign is so important, for, he
explained, Sanders has gone out of his way to support union struggles –
a record not sufficiently known in its specifics, but a record important
to remember. A Sanders presidency would not be about union presidents
having access to the White House; it is about having a committed ally
for workers mobilizing and organizing to assert their rights. Labor’s
gains have only ever come through such action; they have never been
gained by passive waiting.

***A Quote***

Townsend referred to lessons of the past contained in some of William Z.
Foster’s writing. A syndicalist and later Communist trade union leader,
he was a successful mass organizer in the meatpacking and steel
industries and strategist in labor struggles through the early and
mid-20^th^ century. In a pamphlet written in 1925, when union strength
was at a low point, Foster wrote the following lines that remain
relevant today, when union strength is again at a low point:

“A glaring weakness of conservative trade unionists in attempting to
organize the unorganized is their failure to take into consideration
this fact, that the mass of workers have organized themselves in order
to fight immediately for their demands. The conservatives stress the
organizational side too much and the struggle side too little. … They
proceed upon the basis that workers can be brought into the unions
slowly, man by man, and then held there indefinitely until the great
mass is organized, when sometime in the distant future, perhaps demands
will be made on the employers for better conditions. Such a theory is of
course absurd. …

“The future trade unions of the great unorganized industries will be
born in the heat of struggle **… Organization campaigns … are
preparations for strikes.** They are a struggle for position between the
employers and workers in the big battle that is soon to come, the strike
over establishment of better conditions. It is in this sense that such
campaigns must be conceived and carried through”

**\[American Trade Unionism: Selected Writings** *by William Z. Foster,
pp 169-170, International Publishers 1947 (1970 edition).*\]

[*GOOD READS FOR SOCIALISTS – our March
compendium*](http://dsadc.org/good-reads-for-socialists-our-march-compendium/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2016**

**&gt;&gt;Socialist-Feminist Good Reads—Kurt Stand starts us off with a
roundup of recent reads that bear on our February Salon on Socialist
Feminism:**

 

*“A lifted world lifts women up,” *\
*The Socialist explained.*\
*“You cannot lift the world at all*\
*While half of it is kept so small,”*\
*The suffragist maintained.*\
*The world awoke, and tartly spoke:*\
*“Your work is all the same:*\
*Work together or work apart,*\
*Work, each of you, with all your heart—*\
*Just get into the game!”*

 

A poem written by Charlotte Perkins Gilman, a socialist and a feminist,
in 1912 speaks directly to Carolyn Byerly’s talk at our Socialist Salon.
The poem is included in an article by Peter Dreier, “Gloria Steinem
Renews an Old Debate About Socialism and Feminism,” that was posted as a
blog in *Dissent*
[*https://www.dissentmagazine.org/blog/gloria-steinem-hillary-clinton-socialism-feminism-history*](https://www.dissentmagazine.org/blog/gloria-steinem-hillary-clinton-socialism-feminism-history)

Dreier puts Steinem’s criticism of young women supporting Bernie Sanders
in an historical context, noting the narrowness that results when
economic justice and the rights of women are perceived as separate.
Speaking in more direct personal terms of the moment, Holly Wood
explains in no uncertain terms why, as a millennial feminist, she has no
problem with support Sanders and opposing Clinton
([*http://www.villagevoice.com/news/feeling-the-yern-why-one-millennial-woman-would-rather-go-to-hell-than-vote-for-hillary-8253224*](http://www.villagevoice.com/news/feeling-the-yern-why-one-millennial-woman-would-rather-go-to-hell-than-vote-for-hillary-8253224)).
So too, Kate Albright-Hanna discusses her evolution from having been a
Clinton intern in 1995, someone who admired Hillary Clinton, into
someone who strongly wanted Elizabeth Warren to run this year, and
absent that alternative, unreservedly supports Bernie Sanders today. She
writes:

“They say that I’m so blinded by my devotion to economic justice that
I’m willing to miss this historic opportunity to lift up my sisters
(well, just this one very special sister). To which I say: Patriarchal
countries around the world have been passing the baton to the female
relatives of male leaders for centuries. It’s always been one of the
cracks in BroWorld — one that a few lucky women have been able to slip
through. But I don’t want to just slip through a crack. I want to break
BroWorld into a million pieces. That’s why this BernieLady is on board
for the revolution.”
([*https://medium.com/@katealbrighthanna/a-bernielady-in-a-broworld-b95d89a6952a\#.lsguygpmc*](https://medium.com/@katealbrighthanna/a-bernielady-in-a-broworld-b95d89a6952a#.lsguygpmc)).

Feminism and support for economic justice go hand in hand, something
Barbara Ehrenreich, who played a key role in DSA’s commitment to
socialist feminism at its founding in 1982, has always stressed. This
comes through in an article which addresses the shortening life span of
white working class men today, symptomatic of the economic injustice
African-Americans, Latinos, women of color, face in even harsher terms.
([*http://www.huffingtonpost.com/barbara-ehrenreich/middle-class-life-expectancy\_b\_8687694.html*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/barbara-ehrenreich/middle-class-life-expectancy_b_8687694.html)).
Awareness of the ways race, class, gender impact upon one another – and
how theories and politics of liberation need address that interaction is
the ground upon which intersectionality emerged. Victor Wallis, an
editor of the journal *Socialism & Democracy*, attempts an explanation
of the term both historically and theoretically in Intersectionality’s
Binding Agent:
 [*http://tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/07393148.2015.1089032*](http://tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/07393148.2015.1089032)

 

Without using the term, Beyonce’s “Formation,” performed at the
Superbowl to commemorate the 50^th^ anniversary of the founding of the
Black Panther Party, made linkages in struggles for justice, celebrating
women’s leadership in the struggle for black lives as discussed by
Malini Johar Schueller in Counterpunch .
([*http://www.counterpunch.org/2016/02/16/lessons-from-beyonce/*](http://www.counterpunch.org/2016/02/16/lessons-from-beyonce/)).
Linkages also made by Angela Davis who explained in an article
connecting the struggles of the Black Panther Party in her youth to
those of Black Lives Matter explained: “the feminist notion of
intersectionality is one that should be incorporated into our work as
well. I like to talk about the intersectionality of struggles, and how
important it is to link the struggle against gender violence with the
struggle against state violence, police crimes, and crimes against
women’s bodies.”
([*http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ebonycom/angela-davis-talks-black\_b\_9254196.html*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ebonycom/angela-davis-talks-black_b_9254196.html)).
And, finally, she and her sister Fania Davis (who played a key role in
the worldwide “Free Angela” campaign in 1970 when false FBI charges
threatened the death penalty) gave a joint interview in *Yes Magazine*
in which they emphasize that *“Self-care and healing and attention to
the body and the spiritual dimension—all of this is now a part of
radical social justice struggles.”*  
([*http://www.yesmagazine.org/issues/life-after-oil/the-radical-work-of-healing-fania-and-angela-davis-on-a-new-kind-of-civil-rights-activism-20160218*](http://www.yesmagazine.org/issues/life-after-oil/the-radical-work-of-healing-fania-and-angela-davis-on-a-new-kind-of-civil-rights-activism-20160218))

And thus we see in these articles – different articles, reflecting
different emphasis and points of view — aspects of what was raised in
the talk and subsequent discussion.   All fuel for further though and
action – individual and collective.

**&gt;&gt;Andy Feeney delves into the (somewhat) startling speech on
banks too big to fail by Neel Kashkari, former henchman of Tim Geithner
and Ken Paulson…**\
**Bernie’s Right About Dismantling Big Banks – According to Bush’s 2008
Bank Bailout Czar**

In 2008, a former Goldman Sachs banker, Neel Kashkari, headed up George
W. Bush’s emergency program to keep the U.S. financial system from
collapsing in response to a fast-moving financial crisis. As Assistant
Treasury Secretary with responsibility for the newly created Troubled
Asset Relief Program (TARP), Kashkari oversaw the disbursal of hundreds
of billions of dollars in payments to some of the nation’s largest
financial institutions to keep them afloat during the crisis.

Kashkari, a Republican who made an unsuccessful run for Governor of
California in 2014, is now President of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis. And in his new position, he declared in a Feb 16 speech to
the Brookings Institution that some U.S. banks have become “too big to
fail” and that because of this, they pose a continuing threat to the
health of the economy.

Although the Dodd-Frank Act financial reforms of a few years ago have
significantly strengthened the financial viability of such banks,
Kashkari told the Brookings audience, there is still a risk that in some
future financial downturn, they will again face possible collapse and
require a bailout from the taxpayers.

For these and other reasons, Kashkari has said that Congress should move
either to break up these giant institutions into smaller pieces which
can be allowed to fail without significant threat to the economy, or
convert them into highly regulated public utilities, with little ability
to take on major risks, or systematically tax “leverage” – the use of
borrowed money for speculation and investment purposes – throughout the
financial system to reduce the risk of future crises.

Introducing Kashkari at the Brookings event was David Wessel, a
long-time financial reporter and contributing editor to the *Wall Street
Journal*, who is currently Director of the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and
Monetary Policy at Brookings.

In a remark quoted in the *New York Times,* Wessel said in the panel
discussion following the speech that he could imagine Bernie Sanders or
Elizabeth Warren voicing some of the ideas that Kashkari had expressed,
but they weren’t what one normally expects from a “Goldman Sachs
Republican.” Kashkari, the *Times* reported, replied that in his current
position, he felt a duty to express his concerns about the banking
system, and that if he didn’t, he wouldn’t be doing his job.

For a link to Kashkari’s speech, you can visit the Minneapolis Fed’s web
site at
[*https://www.minneapolisfed.org/news-and-events/presidents-speeches/lessons-from-the-crisis-ending-too-big-to-fail*](https://www.minneapolisfed.org/news-and-events/presidents-speeches/lessons-from-the-crisis-ending-too-big-to-fail)
.

For the *Times* article on the speech, visit
[*http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/17/business/dealbook/federal-reserves-kashkari-says-banks-still-too-big-to-fail.html?\_r=0*](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/17/business/dealbook/federal-reserves-kashkari-says-banks-still-too-big-to-fail.html?_r=0)
.

For a Brookings video of the speech, click here:
[*http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/brookings-now/posts/2016/02/kashkari-big-banks-still-risk-regulations-not-far-enough*](http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/brookings-now/posts/2016/02/kashkari-big-banks-still-risk-regulations-not-far-enough)
.

 

**&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;The Basics of Socialism: a list of introductory reads
about DSA and socialism**

It’s a PDF, not the most helpful format, but here it is:
[*http://www.dsausa.org/introductory\_reading\_list*](http://www.dsausa.org/introductory_reading_list)

 

**&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;Other entries on this month’s Good
Reads roster:**

Jeremy Gilbert has a very stimulating, if traditionally framed, argument
in Red Pepper (Brit) on the need for a conscious pro-modernity strategy
in advancing socialism. We get it by way of *Portside*.
[*http://www.redpepper.org.uk/the-case-for-radical-modernity/*](http://www.redpepper.org.uk/the-case-for-radical-modernity/)

Our DSA comrade Mike Hirsch’s review of a new book by Danny Katch that
Mike says walks the curious into socialist perspectives with humor and
ease.
[*https://indypendent.org/2016/02/02/danny-katch%E2%80%99s-socialism-sense-humor*](https://indypendent.org/2016/02/02/danny-katch%E2%80%99s-socialism-sense-humor)
This book will be discussed at the next Socialist Book Group meeting
April 3; check our Meetup page for details.

Gar Alperovitz’s latest magazine-scale summary of the collab-co-op
developments around the nation – especially those with regional scope –
that he and the Democracy Collaborative have been working on and
celebrating. From *The Nation*:
[*http://www.thenation.com/article/socialism-in-america-is-closer-than-you-think/*](http://www.thenation.com/article/socialism-in-america-is-closer-than-you-think/)

A nice extended discussion of capitalist development in terms of the
development of precapitalist market formations – a fine walk-up to
today’s alt-economy activism. It includes insights championed by the
late scholar Ellen Meiksins Wood. It’s from the “Next System Project”
associated with the Democracy Collaborative, via *Portside*.
[*http://thenextsystem.org/markets-in-the-next-system/?mc\_cid=4a000b2755&mc\_eid=12da9a7821*](http://thenextsystem.org/markets-in-the-next-system/?mc_cid=4a000b2755&mc_eid=12da9a7821)

Thomas Piketty’s Feb. 16 article in *The Guardian* (translated from a
*Le Monde* appearance) about the effect and root of the Sanders campaign
is just plain fun to read.
[*http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/feb/16/thomas-piketty-bernie-sanders-us-election-2016*](http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/feb/16/thomas-piketty-bernie-sanders-us-election-2016)

The red-baiting of Sanders and his campaign comes from all quarters.
Here Doug Henwood takes on Paul Starr’s shots from the anterooms of the
American Prospect.

http://lbo-news.com/2016/02/24/liberal-redbaiting/

Bill Fletcher Jr. posted this analysis by Peter Feld on his Facebook
page – delves into the question of Sanders’s shying away from attacking
Hillary Clinton’s foreign policy record and whether that has diminished
his appeal.
[*http://mondoweiss.net/2016/02/did-dodging-foreign-policy-doom-bernie-sanders/*](http://mondoweiss.net/2016/02/did-dodging-foreign-policy-doom-bernie-sanders/)

Neel Kashkari, a Republican op who aided Treasury Sec. Hank Paulson in
devising the partial solution to the 2008 financial crisis, has been
named the chair of the Minneapolis branch of the Federal Reserve.
Speaking as a Fed subchieftain but not, he says, for the rest of the Fed
board, he argues that Dodd-Frank needs to be strengthened to prevent a
recurrence, and that many banks remain too big to fail and therefore are
eligible to be broken up (!)
[*https://minneapolisfed.org/news-and-events/presidents-speeches/lessons-from-the-crisis-ending-too-big-to-fail*](https://minneapolisfed.org/news-and-events/presidents-speeches/lessons-from-the-crisis-ending-too-big-to-fail)

DSADC steering committee member Kurt Stand has had the first part of a
two-part essay on the similarities and differences of the Left in the US
and Germany published online by the Stansbury Forum…
[*http://stansburyforum.com/transformative-politics-german-leftus-left-same-challengesame-fight/*](http://stansburyforum.com/transformative-politics-german-leftus-left-same-challengesame-fight/)

And for something completely different, and pretty much non-socialist,
here is an article from *Business Week* (gasp!). It is about code. You,
know, what coders do. Your correspondent has it on good authority from
some academic types that this is actually a good introduction.

[*http://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-paul-ford-what-is-code/?cmpid=BBD022416*](http://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-paul-ford-what-is-code/?cmpid=BBD022416)

[*History of Socialist Feminism(s) Is Traced in February
Salon*](http://dsadc.org/history-of-socialist-feminisms-is-traced-in-february-salon/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2016**

*By Rose Driscoll*

Socialist feminism is a way of thinking that links the gender-based
oppression women face with the oppression of a lower class under
capitalism. Historically, the owners of the means of production could
profit more from women’s labor because they were not legally obligated
to pay women as much.

In a discussion led by Dr. Carolyn M. Byerly, nearly thirty members of
Metro DC DSA analyzed the state and effect of socialist feminism.
Byerly, a longtime DSA member, laid out a thorough history of the
feminist movement in the western world and in America in particular, a
narrative of manufacture of our own consent, both rewards and
punishment.

The rising garment industry was well-organized and heavily comprised
Eastern European immigrants who were familiar with socialism and with
ownership that exploited and treated women poorly. Still, when they
began to unionize, they lacked focus on women workers. Similarly,
Gandhi’s movement for liberation in India did not include a reform of
the treatment of women, evident in the sexual violence still rampant
(though bitterly fought against) in modern India.

The “second wave” of feminism, led largely by liberal feminists, sought
largely to gain for women the same opportunities offered to their male
counterparts as well as protections against sexual violence, both
domestically (i.e. domestic abuse and spousal rape) and at work and in
the public sphere (i.e. sexual harassment). The second wave accomplished
new rape laws, founded women’s shelters, and won rights to abortions and
college education.

But liberal feminists operate under the assumption that equality can be
achieved through individual choices and need not rely on a wider sphere
in government, society, or through communal work. The leaders of the
movement — Gloria Steinem, Betty Friedan — had a blind spot around labor
in general and family leave in particular. While some socialist
feminists worked within the liberal feminist movement, founding communes
and collectives, the mainstream actors remained fixated on
individualistic feminism within a capitalist framework with an emphasis
on personal choice.

At the DSA salon, this prompted a discussion of whether capitalism is
inherently patriarchal — and indeed, whether any advanced society has
been able to work beyond patriarchal frameworks. While more egalitarian
societies than our own have adopted workable communal ownership or the
means of production, none has established a matriarchy, let alone
developed the industrialization and technology that we consider
necessary based on our own rampant consumerism.

And in addition to consumerism, we in modern America place great value
in our war machine. The DSA salon had a long discussion on whether the
military-industrial complex is attributable solely to the patriarchy.
While no doubt men have largely led the war machine, notable exceptions
include Secretary of State and presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton.
Likewise there is nothing to suggest that masculinity is inherently and
unchangeably violent, despite the media’s best efforts to convince the
public otherwise. Men can indeed overcome the societal expectations to
stand on throats — whether physically or financially.

The oversight is what inspired many groups to splinter off and search
for their own feminism. African American feminists, seeking to distance
themselves from the liberal (and largely white) feminists, struck out
into womanism. This new framework allowed them to consider the
intersectionality of race, gender, and class oppression. Angela Davis,
working from a Marxist analysis of slavery, led the Communist Party of
the USA and worked closely with the Black Panthers to work for Civil
Rights and — and to provide meals for neighborhood children before
school.

The main difference between the feminism of Angela Davis or any
socialist feminist, and that of Gloria Steinem or any liberal feminist,
is in the analysis of the problem. Socialists, feminists or not, frame
the problem first in the exclusive ownership of the means of production,
whereas liberal feminists see the exclusivity of capitalism’s ruling
class and the hierarchy it creates,  and deem it acceptable — as long as
a woman *could be* one of those ruling capitalists, some day.

But not only is women’s liberation is a central plank in any reform of
capitalism; women will never be fully liberated within a capitalist
structure. Even today, capitalist oppression targets women specifically.
Women are often viewed by capitalists as a means to make money rather
than respected in terms of their own rights. The prevalence of gendered
messaging in beauty, fashion, and diet industries often result in mental
health issues and sexual abuse for women and girls. The recording artist
Kesha attempted to release herself from a contract with music industry
giant Sony after years of abuse and sexual assault at the hands of her
producer, but her request was denied on the property-based premise that
Sony had paid her contract and owned the rights to any music she might
make, thereby forcing her to continue to work with her rapist. And more
insidious is the outdated but clinging notion that women cannot both
have children and work — men see a 6 percent pay raise if they have a
child, [*while a woman’s pay decreases 4 percent
*](http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/02/political-power-single-women-c-v-r.html)for
every child she has.

How to improve the lives of female workers everywhere? Offer paid family
leave and paid sick leave. Women are still relied on to provide the
majority of work in the home, whether for care of the house or for a
spouse, for children or for sick and elderly relatives. Support
healthcare reforms that help women choose the size of their families and
make the care for those families affordable. Raise the minimum wage —
two-thirds of minimum wage workers are women, and that’s just in the US.
Feminism is on the rise globally, through education becoming readily
available online and increasingly in person. Feminists and socialists
alike will need to continue fighting to ensure that quality education is
available to women worldwide.

Domestically, feminist socialists will need to bring concerns at the
intersection of feminism and the redistribution of wealth — paid family
and sick leave and quality sexual health education to our lawmakers. We
will need to offer support to women who are deemed less valuable than
money — those working for minimum wage, those who are still expected to
complete all the unpaid tasks of the homemaker, and those who are forced
to endure sexual abuse in order to continue to make the money they need
to survive. We will need to highlight these concerns in discussion with
liberal feminists in order to bring awareness to the problems of
capitalist ideologies.

*Metro DC DSA holds a Socialist Salon – generally, a meal and discussion
– on the third Thursday of each month. For current updates, visit our*
[**Meetup page**](http://www.meetup.com/DC-DSA/events/228866609/).

[*Human Cost of Our De-industrial Revolution - A Review of Lynn
Nottage’s
“Sweat”*](http://dsadc.org/human-cost-of-our-de-industrial-revolution-a-review-of-lynn-nottages-sweat/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2016**

** ***By Kurt Stand*

Who we are and what we can become cannot be separated from the
circumstances of our lives, a truism that denies those glib assertions
about lifting yourself by your bootstraps. Yet plant closures and lost
strikes always leave in their wake suicides, marriage breakups, drug and
alcohol abuse, spikes in petty crime and violence, all predictable
consequences of loss. And not just material loss, but loss of a sense of
purpose or control that comes with a demonstration of powerlessness.
Anyone who has witnessed up close or experienced the devastation of
lockouts, lengthy strikes, plant closings, long-term unemployment will
know the devastating truths revealed in Lynn Nottage’s ***Sweat***
staged this season at the Arena Theatre.

The play focuses on the lives of three women workers (Tracey, Cynthia,
Jessie) at a steel mill who survive through thick and thin, taking
strength in the work they do, the mutual support they can give each
other – mutual support that helps mitigate the harsh world of labor, of
personal disappointments or family troubles, because of the community
they form and share. But that mutuality, that sharing, that solidarity
is made possible because a stable job and a strong union gives them a
sense of security around which they can try and build a build a life.
And so their friendships cannot survive the destruction of job, union
strength or community.

Their stories – and that of the other characters in ***Sweat*** — are
based on conversations Nottage had in Reading, Pennsylvania – once a
thriving industrial center, today the poorest city in the United States;
a multi-racial, multi-ethnic poverty. In her words: “Reading has been
through an incredibly hard time. There was a level in some rooms of
desperation, of profound sadness. In some rooms you could feel the
nostalgia for what was and the longing for that to return. I think in
some cases, there was genuine confusion: like, we signed with a contract
with America, these were the things we were supposed to receive, and
somehow we were lied to. So I think that people felt betrayed.”

Betrayed is another term for loss, a theme addressed by two of the most
beautifully written monologues in the play. Jessie recalls a moment,
just out of high school, when she and her then boyfriend thought that
they would pursue the hippie dream, and travel through Asia (the 1960s
an era when countries of the far and middle east felt like havens from
materialism, rather than centers of “terrorism”) the names of the cities
never visited repeated like an incantation. Instead, marriage, family,
factory work took up her life; with the husband leaving her for a
younger women only adding insult to injury in thought of the road not
traveled. While in a reminiscence that is an attempt at an explanation
of herself, Tracey tells of being taken around the city by her
grandfather, a stone mason whose work was etched in buildings around the
city, a piece of Tracy in each, at a time when craft and labor were
visibly respected – a story told when the buildings themselves no longer
stand. Both are white, and they speak precisely to what Nottage saw and
heard, people in disbelief about the promise of our country, the social
contract working people struggled for so painfully, being broken so
thoroughly as if it had never existed at all.

For Cynthia, an African-American woman, those illusions did not exist; a
racist society always means living on the edge. Still she had lived
progress in the move from South to North, lived progress in steady
employment, decent wages, union organization, that made possible a
different kind of life with different kinds of possibilities. Her
estranged husband, a once proud man who stood strong when challenged by
management, became lost as the lockout at his plant took away his pride,
his lack of work took away his self-respect, his drug habit takes away
the pain of looking at what he doesn’t have. Recalling these brief
instances from the play however, misrepresents a bit the depth of
Nottage’s characterizations – each is three-dimensional, filled with
depth and nuance. And thoughts of the past do not suggest a romantic
nostalgia; life was always hard and filled with challenges, even a
strong union didn’t make a life of factory work easy; physical pain from
a life of labor is never distant for any of them. And the pleasure all
take in drinking at the bar in which the play is set itself reflects a
desperation even in moments of pleasure they do manage to create. But
that recent past allowed a sense of place from which to resist – as an
individual, as part of something larger – and to build; and the ability
to resist and renew is precisely what winds up being taken away.

And the portrait of the complexity of each individual is why the play as
a whole is so compelling, for it never takes the easy way out. Midway
through, Cynthia is promoted into management, an advance especially
meaningful to someone who had to face racism in every step on a journey
to build a life that is more than drudgery, an advance that leads her to
a conflict in loyalties, an advance that doesn’t protect her when the
factory itself is closed. Yet it is a brief moment of progress that
comes with a different kind of hurt, for the undercurrent of jealousy it
creates with Tracey also brings to the surface traces of a racism in
Tracey that otherwise wouldn’t have come to the fore – and yet doesn’t
deny the fact of how real, how deep and meaningful their mutual
friendship had been.

A friendship that had been passed on to their two sons, themselves
factory workers (though Cynthia’s son once aimed toward college),
embittered and lost to themselves and each other by strike-connected
violence that leads them both to prison; the forces destroying the
community robbing them of their future. A future never even open to
Oscar, the Dominican who can only get work cleaning up at the bar,
unseen as a person by black or white – unable to ever get work at the
factory until the lockout lands him a temporary job as a scab.   Implied
throughout is that the evils to be uprooted are not the choices made in
desperation or anger, but rather the path of society that create such
unpalatable choices. This is voiced by Stan, the bartender an almost
constant presence in the play. A Vietnam veteran, a former factory
worker until injury made him “unfit” – he speaks throughout as one who
tries to create a sense of mutual understanding amongst warring friends,
to give a sense of the past receding in memory, articulating what
amounts to a progressive, class-conscious point of view. Not that the
character as written would use such words himself, rather such a
description comes from noting his ability to see the whole of what is
happening rather than the part. Stan’s fate – devastating to see on
stage – then becomes a metaphor of the working-class voice being taken
from them.

Nottage’s other plays – all with strong African-American and African
themes – touch on the politics of daily life in ways both tragic
(***Ruined***; ***Intimate Apparel***) and comedic (***By the Way Meet
Vera Stark***) that bring to life social realities by a focus on the
mundane and the personal – exploring social conflict through the
relationship of individuals. It carries on a tradition one can find in
the works of Eugene O’Neil, Susan Glaspell, Lillian Hellman, Arthur
Miller (Nottage recently edited and introduced a new anthology of his
works), Lorraine Hansberry, Ntozake Shange, or August Wilson by
developing a radical politics which is not explicitly such, which does
not directly speak about “current events” or particular historical
leaders. Rather a picture is painted of the whole through the
interaction of one to another that is critical and challenging of
conventional wisdom and comfortable certainties , following a path
perhaps best seen in Sean O’Casey’s plays. So the politics are there in
its indirection – just as the centerpiece of the play is the life of
these three women, yet it begins with the two young men talking to their
parole officer after release from prison, and ends with them back at the
(now gentrified) bar in a return to the scene that brought them to jail.

The year of that beginning and end is 2008, a year of massive plant
closings, and the rest of the play is set in 2000, the year of NAFTA; a
purposeful connection made by Nottage, although neither NAFTA nor bank
failures are ever mentioned in ***Sweat***. Ever in the background, they
are the impersonal forces that impact on people for whom politics is
usually assumed to be for other people. Purposeful too is its opening
last year, its staging in DC at the Arena in the midst of the
presidential elections, for Nottage recognizes that something must be
done, the people need to pay attention and to act. ***Sweat*** certainly
paints a grim picture, and there is little glimmer of hope for anyone at
its close. But that does not make it a despairing work. We get a glimpse
of who these people were, what they had been and built – and what was
once built can be rebuilt.

Reading was once not only a center of union strength, it was one of the
last industrial strongholds of the Socialist Party – the city elected
and re-elected a socialist Mayor in the 1930s. Gone by the 1950s, it was
still a solid Democratic, New Deal oriented, industrial town. Then came
changes people didn’t understand, the loss of broader social solidarity
that left unions isolated – and left unions with the illusion that they
could survive in their isolation. The Reagan years destroyed that
illusion and showed the corrosive impact of the loss of solidarity which
rolled over our country in waves that always seem to hit people unaware.
But those who created the destruction were aware, manufacturing towns
and industrial unions were not undermined by some mysterious process,
they were destroyed systemically by rapacious corporate owners in a
system that defines value solely by increasing profits. And so pride in
work for its own sake, dignity and community as values of greater import
than the quick buck, worker organization to secure and protect such
values – are threats to be tolerated by corporate powers when necessary,
and crushed whenever possible

Increasing numbers of people are now aware of that broader reality. We
see it all around us, not least in the public response to Sanders’s
presidential campaign. It is to that search for understanding that
***Sweat*** – like many other recent works of theatre – speaks.  
Speaking to inform or encourage action based on awareness and
togetherness; the combination that enables hope to emerge.   An
encouraging sign of such a combination was the large number of seats
reserved by the Metro Labor Council at the Arena on January 27,
expanding thereby the number of union members who could see and reflect
upon the play.

Nottage puts this in notes that appeared in the Playbill describing what
led her to write ***Sweat*** after reading an email she received from a
close friend: “ ‘She said that she was completely broke; she was having
a very difficult time making ends meet and had reached a level of
desperation.’ Her friend wasn’t asking for a handout, but said she
wanted her close friends to understand her circumstances. … ‘I’d known
this woman extremely well, and I had no idea the depths of her despair.
She lives two doors down from me, and it made me realize that probably
most of us are living two to three doors away from someone who is either
in poverty or on the verge of poverty, and that’s the nature of the
culture we’re living in right now.’

“The Occupy Wall Street movement was just beginning. ‘We had no sense of
what this was. All we knew was that there were these people in Zuccotti
Park sitting there and saying, 99 percent of us are suffering while 1
percent are continuing to get richer and richer.’ The two walked in
circles and chanted. Later, her friend said, ‘I actually feel a little
better. Nothing has happened, but I feel better to know that at least
there is a voice to what I’m feeling and I’m not by myself.’”

[*Maryland’s Paid Sick Leave Bill — Hitting the Committee Wall
Again?*](http://dsadc.org/marylands-paid-sick-leave-bill-hitting-the-committee-wall-again/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2016**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Maryland’s progress in supporting struggling families has been
significant in recent years – raising the minimum wage toward \$15 and
hour by stages, for instance.

But there are several pieces to supporting those struggles that remain
to be put in place, and one of the biggest is on legislators’ plates –
again – this week.

Paid sick leave, which is up for consideration for the fourth straight
year, is a critical element in family stability and the chance for
people to get traction and improve their lives. As before, it is in
danger of committee burial, as Del. David Moon explicitly warned at the
Progressive Neighbors forum in Silver Spring Feb. 28. Hearings before
those critical House and Senate committees are coming up this week,
March 1 and 3 (details below, including a way for Maryland residents to
express support to legislators). DSA nationally and the Metro DC DSA
local have supported the paid sick leave effort as a critical component
of a broad move toward better public provision at every level of
government, including in the District where some progress has been made.

Maryland Del. Luke Clippinger of Baltimore [*recently capsulized the
needs*](http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/opinion/oped/bs-ed-sick-leave-20160218-story.html)
in *The Sun*: “For the more than 700,000 Marylanders who are unable to
earn paid sick days, abiding by a doctor’s orders to stay home and rest
can mean forgoing groceries or rent. The choice is even more
heart-wrenching for working parents who must decide between sending a
sick child to school or day care, versus staying home and missing out on
necessary income.”

Clippinger is lead sponsor of
[*HB0580*](http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/webmga/frmMain.aspx?pid=billpage&tab=subject3&id=hb0580&stab=01&ys=2016RS),
which allows workers at many levels to earn paid sick days as they work.

Further, Clippinger notes, “Nationally, four in 10 private sector
employees are unable to earn paid sick days, and the bottom quarter of
earners suffer the most: 75 percent of them don’t get paid sick leave.
Our most vulnerable workers in Maryland and beyond who are often already
living paycheck to paycheck stand the greatest risk of losing their jobs
simply because they fall ill.

“Not surprisingly, workers without access to paid sick days are more
likely to go to work sick and more likely to delay needed medical care,
leading to prolonged illness and costly emergency room visits. When food
service workers go to work sick, they put Maryland’s public health at
risk”

Progressive Maryland, a pro-worker grassroots group mainly active in
Montgomery and Prince George’s counties, is part of the [*Working
Matters*](https://mdpaidsickdays.wordpress.com/) coalition advocating
for this effort, which stalled in critical committees for the past three
years largely due to complaints from business interests that it will
hurt the economy. As Clippinger detailed in his op-ed, “these concerns
are not borne out by the facts. The experiences of cities and states
around the country that have already implemented sick leave laws
demonstrate that business climate has been healthy, costs have been
minimal and job growth has been strong in municipalities with earned
sick leave laws.”

The House bill is the subject of a hearing in the Economic Matters
Committee at 1 p.m. Tuesday, March 1 and the Senate version is heard in
the Senate Finance Committee at 1 p.m. Thursday, March 3. These are the
two committees that have stalled this effort in past years, and
Progressive Maryland along with other Working Matters coalition members
[*including broad sectors of the faith
community*](https://mdpaidsickdays.wordpress.com/2016/01/12/md-faith-leaders-issue-call-to-action-on-paid-sick-leave/)
are urging that those who are able to attend those hearings in support
of paid sick days do so. **Working Matters has circulated a** [*contact
template*](https://actionnetwork.org/letters/action-alert-urge-lawmakers-to-vote-favorably-on-earned-sick-days?can_id=65a2487e5dd4cbb61591a2fe882293d3&source=email-action-alert-urge-lawmakers-to-vote-favorably-on-earned-sick-days&email_referrer=action-alert-urge-lawmakers-to-vote-favorably-on-earned-sick-days&email_subject=action-alert-urge-lawmakers-to-vote-favorably-on-earned-sick-days&link_id=3)
**to allow constituents to alert committee members to the importance of
these hearings and votes.**

Advocates, particularly working mothers, will lobby the legislators
individually Tuesday morning before the House hearing.

**March 1**

**MomsRising Superhero Lobby Event for Earned Sick Leave**\
**9:30am**\
Anne Arundel Delegation Room\
House Office Building\
6 Bladen St. Annapolis, MD 21401\
[*RSVP for superhero lobby
event*](http://click.actionnetwork.org/mpss/c/2AA/ni0YAA/t.1uy/1oE21WioTbyDbwlEkpmycg/h4/WQ-2BlIwq7W2eCmkkcwbDiBbbPwUfyzAVeutdE2lG-2FrPdl5-2FC96Hpa90XY-2BJBdybaZ3g288LvMNrFqoT9oSieRUnAle8xxaBQ6Jeyf6hTXAPFd9I32yur-2BFu5ikK7x4fmuyrPj2-2BSaz4sTIk54qlv8ZY895EMM0WzBFTAyRGmJ8evFeAWD2SDXUuqV0pkHYgLNDuqhejoU-2F-2BolnDCAO49Oq9HaRh5mIRiVlrIdLQ7q6cTnYLkV2-2FzcfXpUZL96djzRjCYrv-2FhI8RtjKDsjDD9wEuvkEeO94iPTPR0KoLIQu4-2Bknu2-2F16bUsexnRkch8IjbUKFKRajPov77-2BhEUGNPTJB1ya0DtSwpSrEEVx3hgajQ-3D)

**\
House Economic Matters Committee Hearing\
1pm\
**House Office Building\
6 Bladen St. Annapolis, MD 21401

**March 3**

**Senate Finance Committee Hearing\
1pm\
**Senate Office Building\
11 Bladen St. Annapolis, MD 21401

[*METROACCESS RIDERS, WORKERS JOIN TO SEEK REFORM, FIGHT PRIVATIZATION
EFFECTS*](http://dsadc.org/metroaccess-riders-workers-join-to-seek-reform-fight-privatization-effects/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

***The Washington Socialist* &lt;&gt; March 2016**

*By Woody Woodruff*

Disability advocate Heidi Case drew applause from a packed room on Feb.
20 when she asserted that “Riders and workers are natural allies.” Case
was among the speakers at a gathering of more than 100 transit workers,
riders, activists, and elected officials who gathered at the Paint
Branch Unitarian Universalist church in Adelphi, MD, to clamor for
better conditions on Metro Access Vans.

Drivers also demanded their present poverty-level wages of \$13.48 an
hour be increased to \$15, and for sick leave to be included in their
next contract. Presently, they must use vacation days for sick leave,
and after several “sick days off,” they are dismissed.

Metro Access is the service that provides transportation for persons
with disabilities on an appointment basis in the greater DC area. The
meeting was called by Amalgamated Transit Union local 1764, the union
representing Metro Access employees and negotiating with WMATA for a new
contract.

Riders and workers alike are struggling under what they claim are unfair
conditions in the recently privatized system. The parent agency, the
Washington Metro Area Transit Authority (WMATA), has has outsourced this
critical service for disabled persons throughout the metro-wide service
area.. One speaker said the van she drove was owned by a company in
France.

Advocates for riders also seek stronger action by the Metro board to
remedy bad equipment and regulatory constraints. One man spoke from his
wheel chair about Access vans arriving to pick him up but having lifts
that didn’t work or that couldn’t accommodate the weight of him and his
wheelchair. A woman said she rode in a van one day whose door wouldn’t
close.

![](media/image6.jpeg){width="3.125in" height="1.7604166666666667in"}

*Photo: Carolyn Byerly*

Prince George’s Executive Rushern Baker was in attendance but arrived
late, catching heat from activists who said that lateness or absenteeism
can cost them their jobs.

Baker, whose family life is widely known to be affected by his wife’s
Alzheimer’s disease, described how waiting for caregivers sometimes
disrupts his schedule and causes him to be delayed. The tough audience
palpably softened as he spoke.

But Baker was not off the hook as county exec – he had been challenged
before he came through the door by Kimberly Lynch, a paratransit driver
who said somberly that drivers were trying to serve their disabled
customers within a broken system, beset by private companies that skimp
on support and cheat the paratransit users.

In 2013 Metro [*announced award of five
contracts*](http://www.wmata.com/about_metro/news/PressReleaseDetail.cfm?ReleaseID=5447)
totaling \$86 million a year for five years for MetroAccess, including
three transit operators who would get \$68 million to transport disabled
persons. The three transit operators – Veolia (now operating as
TransDev), Diamond and First Transit – continue to provide what is
widely considered substandard service. Metro touted the arrangement as
promoting accountability but MetroAccess driver Lynch argued that
“safety, professionalism and respect” are out of reach as drivers “do
the best we can within a broken system” and that WMATA officials “treat
us like disposable people” and “are more interested in passing the buck
than in providing solutions.”

Case, who is accessibility and safety coordinator of the Metro Rider’s
Union, said of the drivers and dispatchers, “they’re just as stuck in
the system as the rest of us.”

Numerous disabled clients of MetroAccess testified about their
dissatisfaction with the service and with the treatment of the drivers,
who they said were abused by the rules imposed by the private companies.
Valencia Moody, an officer of a Prince George’s chapter of the National
Federation of the Blind, said WMATA board members needed to be reminded
that their job is “service to us, not service to you.”

And driver Eric Williams said that even though Baker represented only
one of the numerous jurisdictions that funded Metro, he had the power of
the purse and of appointments to the WMATA board and should be held
accountable for using them. The disjointed power structure of WMATA, he
said, was “no excuse for inaction” and the driver/rider coalition had to
pressure the other jurisdictions as well.

The goals for the event were read from the podium and executive Baker
was catechized on them, asked to affirm he would push the Maryland
members of the WMATA board to establish a \$15 minimum wage and paid
sick leave for the drivers, who must give up vacation time if they are
sick or caring for sick children. He was pushed, as well, to support
paid sick leave legislation in Prince George’s County (where it had
already failed with no visible support from Baker) and at the state
level (where a bill is pending – see related story).

And he was urged to push for improvements in MetroAccess specifically –

-   Ending a requirement for fare collection outside the vehicle
    regardless of weather or other hazards

-   Ensuring that all van lifts work with actual weight on them, rather
    than empty-lift testing

-   Improving the inadequate Call Center geotracking system, which falls
    well short of GPS capability

-   Review the scheduling software, which often sets wasteful routes and
    unnecessary travel duration for disabled customers

-   Improved sensitivity training on disability that includes input from
    disabled customers.

Baker’s answers were generally “yes” to the demands though he qualified
his “yes” with needs for study and review in some instances. ATU field
organizer David Heller, asked which of the demands would require most
follow-up and watchdogging in Baker’s case, grinned “All of them.”

*Carolyn Byerly contributed to this article.*

[*“PLEASE TELL OUR STORY SIMPLY TO THOSE WE WILL NOT
SEE…”*](http://dsadc.org/please-tell-our-story-simply-to-those-we-will-not-see/)

Monday, February 29th, 2016

* **The Washington Socialist *****&lt;&gt; March 2016**

*By Lynne Williamson*

Review of *The Left Side of History: World War II and the Unfulfilled
Promise of Communism in Eastern Europe*, by Kristen Ghodsee

Kristen Ghodsee interweaves the personal actions and fates of the
Lagadinovs, a Bulgarian communist partisan family, and Major Frank
Thompson, a young British officer sent to provide support to the
partisans in the efforts against fascism in Bulgaria. This interweaving
serves as the structure for the history of the promise and the failure
of communism in World War II and after in Bulgaria.

The word “Left” in the title resonates in two ways. First, “Left,” of
course, stands for the political designation for the communism of the
Bulgarian partisans and their young, doomed British supporter, Frank
Thompson. But the word “Left” also reinforces the ultimate “left behind,
left out, abandoned” historical outcome of the efforts of Thompson and
the Lagadinovs, when the positive hopes for a better future through
communism are horribly eclipsed by the post-war brutalities of Stalin.
This sense of promise lost and the sacrifices of people forgotten is
reinforced throughout the book by the author’s elegiac tone and by
brief, pertinent quotes from Thompson’s war poetry as well as intimate
dialogue with survivors of pre-and-post World War II Bulgaria. As
Ghodsee says, “I wanted to recognize the nuances of what communism meant
to ordinary people, how it motivated or paralyzed them, how it fueled
hope or spread despair. There is the official history of communism and
there is the intimate history of communism—the latter composed of
individual men and women making individual decisions in a confused and
sometimes chaotic world.”\
Frank Thompson died before the triumphant surviving Bulgarian communist
partisans descended from the mountains and into the villages and towns
as war heroes when the Red Army crossed into Bulgaria in September 1944.
Elena Lagadinov, who had at age 11 had smuggled messages and supplies to
her communist partisan brothers because “communism meant dolls and books
for all children,” was among the survivors. In fact, she survived the
partisan period, the Stalinist aftermath and the subsequent era after
1989 called not what the West calls the democratic revolution, but
simply “The Changes.” Elena’s intensely moving conversations with the
author and those of some of her friends about their hopes during the
communist period, particularly the women’s efforts to make life better
for women and families, make up a critical part of the left out, left
behind, abandoned history that Ghodsee captures for us. The author
clearly knows that given the current blackwashed word “communism,”
equating to “Stalinism,” she risks being labeled as “an apologist for
totalitarianism” as she documents the progress of women in Bulgaria
between 1944 and 1989 through their stories.

For example, Elena Lagadinov describes for the author how during the
communist period she developed a comprehensive plan to give women paid
maternity leave and to build more kindergartens, a plan that she gave to
party officials in a three-hour presentation in an effort to socialize
housework in order to incorporate women into society. Elena explains
about the idea of justice that motivated her: “It was about building a
society that would work for the many rather than enriching the few. And
now after “The Changes,” Elena says, “…you see what we have? So many
people are without medicine. So many children are on the street; they
are not going to school. Prostitutes make more money than doctors and
judges. The young people leave to the West and never come back. People
are poorer now than they were before the war, while the rich live in
mansions with swimming pools in Boyana and Dragalevtsi.” Elena’s friend
Anelia says, “Communism was like Cassandra…It told the truth. But it
couldn’t change the future because no one believed it.”

The author ends the book by poignantly reinforcing the sense of
historical change and loss as she describes her trip to all that is left
of the once-proud monument to Frank Thompson and the partisans who
fought to defeat fascism in World War II and to bring the hopes of
communism to Bulgaria. The monument site is described as “deserted and
falling into ruin” with the marble tombstone cracked and crooked. Frank
Thompson’s name is listed with other partisans along with the
inscription *“PLEASE TELL OUR STORY SIMPLY TO THOSE WE WILL NOT SEE,
TELL THOSE WHO SHALL REPLACE US— WE FOUGHT COURAGEOUSLY.”* This
broken-down, abandoned monument is contrasted with the bright, new
monument erected in 1999 celebrating the 10-year anniversary of the
collapse of Bulgarian communism. Ghodsee leaves the reader with a
deepened understanding of the dilemma that led her to write the book:
“If all acts of heroism are ultimately weighed and judged by subsequent
generations of historians … with their own political agendas, why be
brave? Why take a stand? How can you ever be sure that you are fighting
for the right thing?” In this sense, the book serves as Ghodsee’s stand.
